---
author: jamesg.blog
cover_image: >-
  https://screenshots.jamesg.blog/?url=https://jamesg.blog/2025/12/20/the-indie-web-in-2030/
date: '2025-12-23T17:55:12.146Z'
dateFolder: 2025/12/23
description: >-
  In 2030, my greatest hope for the indie web is that it is a place where people
  feel free to create, to experiment, and to always be able to ask – and act on
  the answers to – the question “what do I want this place to be?”.
isBasedOn: 'https://jamesg.blog/2025/12/20/the-indie-web-in-2030'
link: 'https://jamesg.blog/2025/12/20/the-indie-web-in-2030'
slug: 2025-12-23-httpsjamesgblog20251220the-indie-web-in-2030
tags:
  - indieweb
title: The indie web in 2030
---
<p>In 2030, my greatest hope for the indie web is that it is a place where people feel free to create, to experiment, and to always be able to ask – and act on the answers to – the question “what do I want this place to be?”</p>
<p>To enable this, the indie web must be open both technically and have a culture that supports discussion, exploration, and discourse, where we – everyone – looks at the web we have now and asks what we like, what we don’t like, and what we want, and move in the directions that let us build better futures.</p>
<p>We should avoid being prescriptive (you must have a website, a website must have [feature], must be made in [this] way, or your identity must use [this] protocol, and so on), and instead be as open minded as we can be. Rather, I invite us to embrace all that is in the spirit of the indie web, whatever that means to each of us.</p>
<p>How many exciting parts of the indie web are yet to be created that are built upon ideas that have not yet been imagined? This very question imbues a sense of promise about what the indie web could be, and the answers will be evermore fruitful if people feel confident that they are able to shape the web in the way they want.</p>
<p>A further question to entertain is the extent to which one is a member of the indie web if they prefer to read rather than create. If I read blogs or follow accounts on the fediverse but do not myself create, am I on the indie web?</p>
<p>⁂⁂⁂</p>
<p>Being invited to answer the question “where do you want the indie web to be in 2030?” and being able to answer the question on my website feels like the epitome of indie web – we’re discussing and making the culture with its own medium, the web; a place where many voices can be part of the discussion. I love reading others’ perspectives of the indie web. Contrary to the vision imposed by corporate platforms that there are but few shapes for the web, and we need to wait for those platforms to define those shapes, on the indie web we’re all making our web together.</p>
<p>One of the most freeing parts of having a website – which I consider to be one way of the many ways to participate in the indie web – is being able to create my own place on the web; one that’s truly mine. I can create my own design. I can choose my own typography. I can choose how things link together. I can have a sidebar navigation. I can create a list of links to other websites I love – other homes on the web – in the way that I want. And, importantly, so can you, too, do all of this and more on your own personal website. You can turn your image of a home on the web that’s right for you into a reality, and use that space as a place to connect (if connecting with others is indeed what you want; you may just want to make a web page for fun and that’s okay too!).</p>
<p>⁂⁂⁂</p>
<p>When I think about how to get more people on the indie web, I ask myself “why would someone want to join?” What is the merit in there being more people with personal websites? I think this question needs due consideration. I can say confidently that I love having a personal website, but does that mean other people will? Having a website can be a lot of work, and there aren’t the social benefits; to really “own” your presence on the web, there is often a monetary cost, too – a domain name, hosting, etc.</p>
<p>Whether someone sees the benefit of having a website or not, the infrastructure, tooling, and culture should be in place such that you are both able to set one up, and feel like you can get something out of it. You should be able to _try_ having a website and see what it’s like – to be able to create and find and share and explore spaces that interest you. And I think this only works if we build a culture of open-mindedness of what the indie web can be.</p>
<p>Already with social media platforms, people have made their own spaces – communities are built with and congregate on many social platforms. But think of what people could do if people had more control over those spaces. What could be created, both technologically and culturally? I’m sure the answer to that question would surpass my imagination. The web makes it possible to dream big – the idea of giant public squares on centralised social platforms narrowed the field of vision, but we can broaden our horizons once again by asking “what could be?”</p>
<p>⁂⁂⁂</p>
<p>More tools don’t necessarily make a richer indie web – rather, people do. Of all the moments in the indie web I have had over the last year, the best parts have been meeting and talking with people, through both blogs, events, and communities.</p>
<p>Of course, we will need more tools, both creative ones and also ones that address concerns that are as yet not as well explored technologically but are essential for people to feel safe. For instance: how do we make a private indie web where communities can group together without having everything public? What are the privacy implications of the indie web, and where does technology fit in? How have our perceptions of the indie web changed with the advent of scraping by generative text tools?</p>
<p>If the indie web grants us freedom to make our sites in the way we want, we are able to challenge some of the properties that have emerged from social media. Do we really want scale? Do we really want like buttons and reactions? What does a post that is designed to be ephemeral look like? How do we assure trust? How do we ensure we don’t rely too heavily on privacy by obscurity? How do we want to curate our own content? What new forms of collaborative creation could exist?</p>
<p>Decentralisation, alone, will not make the web a better place. We need to ask fundamental questions about what we want from the web, and use the power of the web – to create, collaborate, connect, share, discuss, and debate – to make something we really want.</p>
<p>⁂⁂⁂</p>
<p>In writing this, part of me feels like I am giving a non-answer – that my dream for the future of the indie web is for us to keep asking questions and to avoid homogeneity in defining what the indie web should be. I seem to have more questions than answers. The essence of this sentiment, however, is that asking questions keeps the community open and alive, and that essence is exactly what is needed for the idea of having a personal website to reach more people.</p>
<p>More concretely: I want an open, welcoming web. I want a web where people can share their ideas. I want a social web that supports private discussion. I want a web where people can build new things. I want a web where people can be themselves. And I want a web where it is clear these things are all possible – where the reason for setting up a website is not to “have a website” but because having a website is a means to the end of connecting, as it is for me and so many others.</p>
<p>I hope that, one day, the indie web will be a constellation of communities – maybe there will be an “art web” of writers on art (who are likely already out there!), a “student web” of students who blog about their experiences. Communities may overlap to varying extents, just as publics do on social media – indeed, connecting with others should be the essence of an indie web. If there can be a “BookTok”, there can be an indie web equivalent. (I’d argue, even, there already is: surely there are many book blogs out there already!)</p>
<p>I love having a blog. I love reading others’ blogs. I think having a personal website is cool. I think it is empowering. My website gives me a voice. I love my website being a place for my words, and I enjoy using it as a playground to experiment with web design. I enjoy finding ways to bring in little bits of joy to my website, to the extent that my home page has, for at least the last year, welcomed readers with “I hope this website can bring a little bit of joy into your day.”</p>
<p>I hope others, in trying out having a website, realise the potential of the indie web to give them a voice on the web, then ask: “now that I have my own space on the web, what do I want to do with it?” The world wide web is your oyster.</p>
<p><em>This post is my contribution to the December 2025 IndieWeb Carnival hosted by V.H. Belvadi on the topic "</em><a href="https://vhbelvadi.com/indieweb-carnival-future"><em>where do you see the IndieWeb in 2030?</em></a><em>"</em></p>
