---
author: jamesg.blog
cover_image: >-
  https://screenshots.jamesg.blog/?url=https://jamesg.blog/2025/12/20/designing-for-inactive-users/
date: '2025-12-23T18:05:25.008Z'
dateFolder: 2025/12/23
description: >-
  Artemis, the calm web reader I maintain, is relatively computationally
  intensive in that every hour, Artemis checks web feeds to which users are
  subscribed to see if there are new posts to save and show in a user’s feed..
isBasedOn: 'https://jamesg.blog/2025/12/20/designing-for-inactive-users'
link: 'https://jamesg.blog/2025/12/20/designing-for-inactive-users'
slug: 2025-12-23-httpsjamesgblog20251220designing-for-inactive-users
tags:
  - code
title: Designing for inactive users
---
<p><a href="https://artemis.jamesg.blog">Artemis</a>, the calm web reader I maintain, is relatively computationally intensive in that every hour, Artemis checks web feeds to which users are subscribed to see if there are new posts to save and show in a user’s feed.</p>
<p>I have made several optimisations to make this process as efficient as possible, following best practices for retrieving feeds (i.e. using <code>If-Modified-Since</code> and <code>Etag</code>). Also, because Artemis only updates users’ feeds once per day, a feed only needs to be retrieved in a given hour if there is a user for whom it is midnight in that hour. This, too, reduces the amount of work that Artemis needs to do to keep users’ feeds up to date.</p>
<p>With that said, as with any service, it is expected that not all people who sign up will use the service regularly; a user may sign up to try the service, then not show up again after deciding it is not for them. I don’t know how many people for whom this is the case with Artemis. I intentionally log as little as I can.</p>
<p>Earlier this year, I decided that Artemis should only download feeds for people who use the service, rather than for all people who are registered irrespective of whether they check their accounts. By retrieving only feeds for people who use Artemis, the amount of time spent retrieving feeds would decrease, and data that didn’t need to be collected (because the user who subscribed to the feed wasn’t using Artemis) would not be collected. Also, I would save on storage costs; lower costs make the service more sustainable, especially as it is free.</p>
<p>As part of this decision, I had to reconcile two competing goals: making the feed retrieval service as efficient as possible and retrieving only data for active users, while also tracking as little about users as possible.</p>
<p>With the goal of collecting as little data as possible in mind, I asked: what do I <em>need</em> to know? I decided that Artemis should stop polling feeds if a user has not checked their feed in approximately 60 days (keep reading to know why approximately is significant). This means that I <em>needed</em> to know, at minimum, the last month in which the user had logged in. With this information, I could write logic that says “if a user hasn’t checked their feed in over 60 days, don’t poll any feeds for which the user is the sole subscriber, and don’t update the user’s feed.”</p>
<p>Internally, I call the value <code>last_feed_viewed_at</code>, which takes the form <code>YYYY-MM</code>. When I rolled out this feature, I set the value to the YYYY-MM of when I released the feature. When the user opens their feed, this value is updated.</p>
<p>Technically, and importantly, YYYY-MM doesn’t let me track how many days has passed since a user updated their feed – it lets me know how many months have passed. Thus, if a user last opened their feed on 2025-07 and it is not 2025-09-02, I can only assume that the user’s last day of opening their feed was 2025-07-31. The logic as implemented – if I am reading my code correctly – means that it must be 2025-10 or after in order to know, for sure, that a user who last opened their feed in 2025-07 has been inactive for 60 days or more.</p>
<p>This is why “approximately” is something of a feature: I don’t know what <em>day</em> a user opened their feed last on. I don’t need to in order to fulfil my goal of not retrieving feeds for users who haven’t been active for a while. Not only that, I don’t <em>want</em> to know the last day a user logged in to Artemis, for that would mean I would have the necessary telemetry to easily calculate “daily active users” and such.</p>
<p>With my implementation, all I know is the last month in which a user opened their feed. That’s all I need to know. And in theory I could update my system such that it resets every month past 90 days to a specific date such that I couldn’t calculate decay in users over time (i.e. how many people left in February 2025 vs. March 2025).</p>
<p>If a user has been inactive given these rules, a message will pop up in their feed which says:</p>
<blockquote><strong>Welcome Back!</strong><br/><br/>Since you have not logged in for over two months, we stopped retrieving posts from sites to which you are subscribed.<br/><br/>Now that you are back, we will resume retrieving posts.<br/><br/>Your reader will be back-filled with posts after midnight today in your time zone.<br/><br/>This message will disappear when your feed has been updated.</blockquote>
<p>Here is what the message looks like in the context of the Artemis user interface:</p>
<p>The message sets expectations: your feed has not updated because you have been inactive, but we’ll automatically start updating your feed again as of midnight in your time zone when your feed would next update according to how Artemis works. The user will know that their feed is up to date when the message disappears, as indicated by the direction “This message will disappear when your feed has been updated.”</p>
<p>I thought I’d write this up to share some of my design considerations as I balanced both the necessity to track a piece of information about a user that could easily contribute to a “metric” for growth, and implementing a feature that would allow me to offer a better service, in terms of reducing storage costs (which contributes to the sustainability of the service) and the time spent retrieving feeds (which contributes to the reliability of the service).</p>
<p><em><strong>Addendum</strong>: As writing so often does, this post has illuminated a limitation in my implementation: if a website only shows N latest posts, only the N latest posts at the time of retrieving the feed will be back-filled to a user's account. This means that if a website has posted more than N posts since the last time the user signed in to Artemis, some posts will be missing from the user's account. With that said, at least the user will see the most recent N posts from each website in their feed. Indeed the core function of a web reader is to show the most recent posts anyway.</em></p>
