---
author: 'Raphael Satter, A.J. Vicens'
cover_image: >-
  https://d5mmga4d06vd5s.archive.is/F4t7b/736777cf472cad5ba08ecec49c10f7f0393e8721/scr.png
date: '2025-11-20T00:11:24.046Z'
dateFolder: 2025/11/19
description: >-
  Two months after Charlie Kirk’s assassination, a government-backed campaign
  has led to firings, suspensions, investigations and other action against more
  than 600 people.
isBasedOn: >-
  https://www.reuters.com/investigations/charlie-kirk-purge-how-600-americans-were-punished-pro-trump-crackdown-2025-11-19/
link: >-
  https://www.reuters.com/investigations/charlie-kirk-purge-how-600-americans-were-punished-pro-trump-crackdown-2025-11-19/
slug: >-
  2025-11-19-httpswwwreuterscominvestigationscharlie-kirk-purge-how-600-americans-were-punished-pro-trump-crackdown-2025-11-19
tags:
  - labor
  - politics
title: >-
  The Charlie Kirk purge: How 600 Americans were punished in a pro-Trump
  crackdown
---
<p><a href="https://archive.is/F4t7b#main-content">Skip to main content</a></p>
<p><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/differentiator/">Exclusive news, data and analytics for financial market professionals</a></p>
<p><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/my-news/feed/">My News</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/account/register/signup-options/&amp;journeyStart=navigation">Register</a></p>
<p><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigates/">A REUTERS SPECIAL REPORT</a></p>

<p>Two months after Charlie Kirk’s assassination, a government-backed campaign has led to firings, suspensions, investigations and other action against more than 600 people. Republican officials have endorsed the punishments, saying that those who glorify violence should be removed from positions of trust.</p>
<p>By <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/authors/raphael-satter/">Raphael Satter</a> and <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/authors/a-j-vicens/">A.J. Vicens</a></p>
<p>November 19, 202511:00 AM UTC · Updated ago</p>
<figure>Illustration: John Emerson, photo: REUTERS/Go Nakamura</figure>
<p>When Lauren Vaughn, a kindergarten assistant in South Carolina, saw reports that right-wing influencer Charlie Kirk had been shot at an event in Utah, she opened Facebook and typed out a quote from Kirk himself.</p>
<p>Gun deaths, Kirk said in 2023, were unfortunate but “worth it” if they preserved “the Second Amendment to protect our other God-given Rights.” Following the quote, Vaughn added: “Thoughts and prayers.”</p>
<p>Vaughn, a 37-year-old Christian who has taken missionary trips to Guatemala, said her call for prayer was sincere. She said she hoped reading Kirk’s words in the context of the shooting might prompt her friends to rethink their opposition to gun control<b>.</b></p>
<p>“Maybe now they’ll listen,” she recalled thinking.</p>
<figure>Social media post by Lauren Vaughn quoting Charlie Kirk</figure>
<p>A few days later, Vaughn lost her job. She was one of more than 600 Americans fired, suspended, placed under investigation or disciplined by employers for comments about Kirk’s September 10 assassination, according to a Reuters review of court records, public statements, local media reports and interviews with two dozen people who were fired or otherwise disciplined.</p>
<p>Some were dismissed after celebrating or mocking Kirk’s death. At least 15 people were punished for allegedly invoking “karma” or “divine justice,” and at least nine others were disciplined for variations on “Good riddance.” Other offending posts appeared to exult in the killing or express hope that other Republican figures would be next. “One down, plenty to go,” one said.</p>
<figure>Lauren Vaughn, a teacher assistant in South Carolina, was fired after she posted on social media a quote from Charlie Kirk about gun violence. REUTERS/Allison Joyce</figure>
<p>Others, like Vaughn, say they simply criticized Kirk’s politics.</p>
<p>In the pro-Kirk camp, at least one academic was put on administrative leave after threatening to “hunt down” those celebrating the assassination.</p>
<p>This account is the most comprehensive to date of the backlash against Kirk’s critics, tracing how senior officials in President Donald Trump’s administration, local Republican lawmakers and allied influencers mobilized to enforce the Trump movement’s views. The story maps the pro-Trump machinery of retaliation now reshaping American political life, detailing its scale and tactics, ranging from shaming on social media to public pressure on employers and threats to defund institutions. Earlier reports by Reuters have documented how <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/pro-trump-group-wages-campaign-purge-subversive-federal-workers-2025-08-07/">Trump has purged the federal government</a> of employees deemed opponents of his agenda <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/trumps-war-big-law-leads-firms-retreat-pro-bono-work-underdogs-2025-07-31/">and cracked down on law firms</a> defending people in the administration’s crosshairs.</p>
<p>Americans sometimes lose their jobs after speaking out in heated political moments. Twenty-two academics were dismissed in 2020, the year <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/us/five-years-after-george-floyds-murder-racial-justice-push-continues-2025-05-25/">George Floyd was murdered</a> by a Minneapolis police officer, most for comments deemed insensitive, according to the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, a free-speech advocacy group. In 2024, the first full year following the outbreak of the latest Israel-Gaza war, more than 160 people were fired in connection with their pro-Palestinian advocacy, according to Palestine Legal, an organization that protects the civil rights of American supporters of the Palestinian cause.</p>
<p>The backlash over comments about Kirk’s shooting stands apart because of its reach and its public backing from Trump, Vice President JD Vance and other top government officials. It represents a striking about-face for Republicans, who for years castigated the left for what they called “cancel culture” – the ostracism or punishment of those whose views were deemed unacceptable.</p>
<p>Supporters of the firings say that freedom of speech is not freedom from consequence. Standards of behavior should be high for people like doctors, lawyers, teachers or emergency workers who are in positions of public trust, they said.</p>
<p>In a statement, White House spokesperson Abigail Jackson said: “President Trump and the entire Administration will not hesitate to speak the truth – for years, radical leftists have slandered their political opponents as Nazis and Fascists, inspiring left-wing violence. It must end.” She added: “no one understands the dangers of political violence more than President Trump” after he survived two assassination attempts.</p>
<figure>Trump compared Kirk to assassinated civil rights icon Martin Luther King Jr. when posthumously awarding him the Presidential Medal of Freedom. REUTERS/Cheney Orr</figure>
<p>Turning Point USA, the youth movement Kirk founded in 2012, said in a statement that it supported the right to free speech, “including that of private employers to determine when a bright line has been crossed and an employee deserves to be terminated.” The organization, however, cautioned that while celebrating or gloating over Kirk’s death was “evil and disqualifying behavior, respectfully disagreeing with his ideas, statements, or values is every American’s right.”</p>
<p>Vaughn is challenging her dismissal in a federal lawsuit filed September 18, seeking reinstatement. As part of the case, she submitted a <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/26192634-lauren-vaughn-versus-spartanburg-school-district-five-motion-for-preliminary-injunction/%23document/p34/a2675005">letter</a> she received from the Spartanburg County School District superintendent that described her remarks as “inflammatory, unprofessional, and inappropriate.” Responding to the lawsuit, the district said Vaughn’s post “appeared to endorse Mr. Kirk’s murder or indicate that it was ‘worth’ him losing his life to protect Americans’ constitutional rights.”</p>
<p>The district declined further comment.</p>
<p>The punishments have often been driven by social media campaigns that circulate screenshots of the offending remarks, along with the names and phone numbers of employers, and appeals such as, “Internet, do your thing.” What typically follows are hundreds of angry or threatening messages, Reuters found. Several individuals who were targeted said in interviews they were inundated with phone calls. One recalled receiving a call every minute for an entire day. At least two said the harassment was so intense they plan to sell their homes.</p>
<p>Julie Strebe, a sheriff’s deputy in Salem, Missouri, lost her job after posting comments on Facebook about the shooting, including “Empathy is not owed to oppressors.” She later said she viewed Kirk as an oppressor because, in her words, he sought to marginalize vulnerable groups and used his platform to rally conservative white Christians behind “racist, sexist, hateful views.” She said her bosses were besieged with calls for her dismissal and that, at one point, a hand-drawn sign appeared across from her home reading, “Julie Strebe Supports the Assassination of Charles Kirk.”</p>
<p>Message posted outside Julie Strebe’s house. Handout via REUTERS</p>
<p>Strebe said she installed five surveillance cameras at her home and now fuels her car only at night to avoid neighbors. Moving from Salem would mean leaving extended family, but she said the small city has grown too hostile to stay. “I just don’t feel like I could ever let my guard down,” she said in an interview. Strebe’s former employer, the Dent County Sheriff’s Office, declined to comment.</p>
<p>Many Republican officials have embraced the punitive campaign. Some have <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/us/charlie-kirks-allies-warn-americans-mourn-him-properly-or-else-2025-09-13/">proposed extraordinary measures</a>, including lifetime bans from social media for those deemed to be revelling in Kirk’s death. The U.S. <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/us/us-revokes-visas-six-foreigners-over-comments-made-about-charlie-kirks-death-2025-10-14/">State Department revoked visas</a> for six foreigners who the agency said “celebrated the heinous assassination of Charlie Kirk.” Speaking on a special episode of Kirk’s podcast on September 15, Vice President JD Vance urged his listeners to inflict consequences on those celebrating Kirk’s death.</p>
<p>“Call them out, and, hell, call their employer,” Vance said. Vance’s office pointed Reuters to comments made earlier this year in which the vice president said, “where I draw the line is encouraging violence against political opponents.”</p>
<figure>Vice President JD Vance hosts an episode of 'The Charlie Kirk Show' at the White House, following the assassination of the show's namesake. Doug Mills/The New York Times/Pool via REUTERS</figure>
<figure><blockquote>“<p>Call them out, and, hell, call their employer.</p>”</blockquote><figcaption><p>Vice President JD Vance</p></figcaption></figure>
<p>Some academics compared the backlash to the “Red Scare,” the anti-Communist purge that peaked in the 1950s, when officials, labor leaders and Hollywood figures were accused of Communist ties. Thousands were investigated in a climate of fear that shaped U.S. politics and culture for a generation. There are “very disturbing parallels,” said Landon Storrs, a University of Iowa history professor.</p>
<p>Several prominent Republicans have voiced unease at the clampdown, especially after the Federal Communications Commission openly pressured broadcaster ABC to suspend talk show host Jimmy Kimmel following a monologue in which he suggested that Kirk’s assassin hailed from the political right. Police haven’t fully detailed the findings of their investigation into suspect Tyler Robinson and his motives. Robinson hasn’t entered a plea to the murder and other charges against him.</p>
<p>Republican Senator Ted Cruz warned on his podcast that letting government decide “what speech we like and what we don’t” sets a dangerous precedent. Silencing voices like Kimmel’s might feel good, he said, but “when it’s used to silence every conservative in America, we will regret it.” His spokesperson declined further comment.</p>
<figure>Screen capture of Jimmy Kimmel after returning to television on September 23, 2025</figure>
<h3>‘MASSIVE PURGE OF THESE EVIL PSYCHOS’</h3>
<p>The campaign to punish Kirk’s critics began almost immediately.</p>
<p>About 30 minutes after Trump’s announcement that Kirk had died, right-wing influencers mobilized. Among the first was Chaya Raichik, operator of the widely followed Libs of TikTok account, which had posted on X, “THIS IS WAR,” before highlighting a Massachusetts teacher who had written: “Just a reminder, We’re NOT offering sympathy.”</p>
<p>By night’s end, Libs of TikTok had published or reposted the professional details of 37 individuals, often accompanied by commentary such as “absolutely vile,” “Your tax dollars pay her salary,” or “Would you want him teaching your kids?”</p>
<p>“It’s actually terrifying how many of them are teachers, doctors and military members,” Libs of TikTok wrote the next day. “We need a massive purge of these evil psychos who want to kiII all of us for simply having opposing political views.”</p>
<figure>Screenshot of the Libs of TikTok X account on September 10, 2025</figure>
<p>The Pentagon and the Justice Department issued statements condemning celebrations of Kirk’s death but did not address questions about their relationship with Libs of TikTok.</p>
<p>Right-wing influencer Scott Presler began posting screenshots of Kirk commentary, too.</p>
<p>For many on the right, outraged by celebratory reactions from the left, the wave of firings became a form of catharsis.</p>
<p>“It’s good that they are shamed and humiliated and must live with the repercussions for the rest of their lives,” right-wing podcaster Matt Walsh told his audience as he discussed the firings. “It’s good if they wake up every day until they die wishing they had not said what they said.” Asked for comment, Walsh emailed back: “f**k off.”</p>
<p>On YouTube, video blogger and recovery coach <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aTH36EELSdU">JD Delay expressed glee</a> as he read aloud names of those who had lost their jobs over their remarks.</p>
<figure>Screen capture of JD Delay on YouTube</figure>
<p>“I’m having fun! This is so much fun!” he shouted, raising his hands in excitement. Delay told Reuters that he believes in “accountability and consequences” and that “if you publicly say abhorrent things and get fired from your job, I’m going to laugh at you.”</p>
<p>The punishment campaign sometimes veered off course. In at least five cases, people were wrongly blamed for comments made by others. In another case, <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/us/charlie-kirks-allies-warn-americans-mourn-him-properly-or-else-2025-09-13/">a website that drew up a blacklist</a> called “Expose Charlie’s Murderers” vanished after taking in tens of thousands of dollars in cryptocurrency donations. Attempts to identify and seek comment from the site’s creators were unsuccessful.</p>
<p>Several online influencers said they received hundreds – sometimes thousands – of tips from individuals seeking to get Kirk’s detractors fired. Reuters was unable to verify those figures. But at various points, Presler, Libs of TikTok and other right-wing personalities publicly urged tipsters to be patient as they worked through the volume of submissions.</p>
<p>“Can’t keep up with all of you,” Presler wrote on X on September 12. “Post your submissions below &amp; I’ll go through them as I can.”</p>
<p>A day later, the post had drawn more than 2,700 replies.</p>
<p>The tally of more than 600 people punished for criticizing Kirk is likely an undercount. Many companies and government organizations haven’t publicly disclosed terminations or suspensions.</p>
<p>Those punished came from at least 45 states and represented a cross-section of society, from soldiers and pilots to doctors, nurses and police officers.</p>
<p>In Michigan, an Office Depot employee was fired after being filmed refusing to print a poster memorializing Kirk. In Ohio, a Starbucks barista lost her job after she was accused of writing an anti-Kirk message on a cup of mint tea.</p>
<p>Reuters couldn’t determine the identities of the Office Depot worker or the barista. Office Depot and Kroger – the grocery store chain that runs the Ohio Starbucks – condemned the anti-Kirk incidents and said the people involved were no longer employees.</p>
<p>Requests to 21 federal agencies – including Homeland Security, Veterans Affairs and the Defense Department – for the number of suspensions or dismissals tied to the Kirk assassination were either ignored or declined. When the Office of the Director of National Intelligence was contacted, its deputy chief of staff responded on social media, accusing Reuters of trying to generate sympathy “for the ghouls who celebrate his death.”</p>
<h3>EDUCATORS AMONG THE MAIN TARGETS</h3>
<p>Teachers, academics and university administrators were among those most frequently punished for criticizing Kirk. More than 350 education workers were fired, suspended or investigated in the days following the assassination, including 50 academics and senior university administrators, three high school principals, two cheerleading coaches and a theology instructor.</p>
<p>The prominence of educators in the backlash may stem from several factors. As leaders tasked with shaping young minds, teachers have long been cast by some conservatives as ideologues who aim to pull their students left. Their status as taxpayer-funded employees made any perceived partisan commentary especially combustible.</p>
<figure>Screen capture of a threatening message received by an individual who posted comments about Kirk’s death. Photos and names pixelated by Reuters. </figure>
<figure>Additional menacing messages received by the individual. Photo and offensive language pixelated by Reuters.</figure>
<p>In interviews and public statements, at least six teachers cited another reason for speaking out: concern over the frequency of gun violence at schools nationwide – and anger at those, like Kirk, who have championed widespread access to firearms.</p>
<p>Vaughn, the South Carolina kindergarten assistant, said that was front of mind when she went to Facebook to quote Kirk’s 2023 remark dismissing some fatal shootings as the price to pay to protect gun rights. Like other teachers across the country, she said she regularly practiced active-shooter drills at her elementary school and saw fear on her five-year-olds’ faces as they learned how to hide from a gunman.</p>
<p>As she defended her post on the day of Kirk’s death, she told a Facebook friend that she felt “no satisfaction” at the assassination. “Just heartbreak for everyone and anyone affected by gun violence and the hope that one day, enough will be enough.” Speaking to Reuters later, she said, “The one thing I want people to know is that my message was out of concern for the kids.”</p>
<p>Many educators did celebrate Kirk’s death, including a Virginia teacher who wrote, “I hope he suffered through all of it,” and a Texas middle school intern who said the shooting “made me giggle.” Screenshots of both posts were circulated by right-wing influencers. Reuters could not locate the original posts, which may have been deleted or made private. The Virginia teacher was suspended and the Texas intern was fired. Neither could be reached for comment.</p>
<p>While schools that suspended or fired educators cited disruptions to the learning environment, some private employers pointed to a violation of company values or safety concerns as the basis for terminations. Corporations caught up in the backlash gave a variety of explanations: Delta Air Lines CEO Ed Bastian said in a statement some employees’ comments were in “stark contrast” to the company’s values and violated its social media policy, while a United Airlines statement said the company had “zero tolerance for politically motivated violence or any attempt to justify it.”</p>
<p>At least a dozen Kirk critics who took pains to condemn the shooting also found themselves out of jobs or suspended, sometimes after Republican lawmakers got involved.</p>
<p>The Clemson College Republicans reposted part of his message, labeling him “ANOTHER leftist professor” and calling for his termination. The post was amplified by right-wing influencers and Republican state lawmakers who threatened to defund the public university unless Bregy was fired.</p>
<p>Clemson initially pledged in a September 12 statement to “stand firmly on the principles of the U.S. Constitution, including the protection of free speech.”</p>
<p>The next day, Trump himself reposted a state lawmaker’s call to “Defund Clemson.” On September 16, after South Carolina’s House speaker and Senate president sent a letter to Clemson’s trustees demanding they “take immediate and appropriate action,” the school fired Bregy. Bregy’s Facebook post was “blatantly unprofessional” and “seriously prejudicial to the university,” Clemson <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/26195669-ecf-006-mtn-for-preliminary-injunction-exhibits/%23document/p46/a2675788">said</a> in a letter informing Bregy he had been dismissed.</p>
<figure>Screen captures of social media posts urging Clemson University to fire Josh Bregy</figure>
<p>Bregy is <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/26195668-ecf-001-complaint/">suing</a> Clemson in a South Carolina federal court in a bid to be reinstated. His lawyer, Allen Chaney, said the academic would have kept his job “but for the really aggressive, coercive tactics of elected officials in South Carolina.”</p>
<p>Clemson, State House Speaker Murrell Smith and Senate President Thomas Alexander did not respond to requests for comment. Clemson has yet to file a response to Bregy’s suit.</p>
<p>In at least six other cases, Republican officials publicly threatened to deprive universities and schools of taxpayer funds unless specific critics of Kirk were fired.</p>
<p>Chaney, who serves as legal director of the South Carolina chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, said the threats to defund Clemson and others crossed a constitutional line. “The government can’t police speech by pressuring third parties,” he said. Last year, the Supreme Court unanimously held that government officials cannot use their authority to “attempt to coerce” private parties into punishing or suppressing speech they dislike.</p>
<p>The threats to defund schools that resist firing Kirk’s critics were “stunning,” said Paul McGreal, a constitutional law professor at Creighton University Law School in Nebraska. “Government officials are threatening speakers with punishment because they disagree with what they’re saying. These are core First Amendment protections that they’re violating.”</p>
<h3>KIRK PRAISED AS CHRIST’S ‘13TH DISCIPLE’</h3>
<p>Since Kirk’s assassination, many Republicans have cast him as a saintly champion of free expression. Evangelical figures have likened him to Saint Stephen, revered as Christianity’s first martyr. One Republican lawmaker told Congress “he’d have been the 13th disciple” had he lived in Biblical times. Trump compared Kirk to the ancient Greek philosopher Socrates, slain President Abraham Lincoln and assassinated civil rights icon Martin Luther King Jr. when posthumously awarding him <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/us/trump-award-charlie-kirk-top-honor-amid-crackdown-left-wing-groups-2025-10-14/">the Presidential Medal of Freedom</a>.</p>
<p>Kirk’s legacy is complicated, however. He gained fame for debating college students as part of his work with Turning Point. Kirk also advocated criminalizing expression – such as pornography – that clashed with his Christian views. When Black football players started kneeling during the national anthem in protest at police brutality, he backed Trump’s call to strip the National Football League of taxpayer subsidies. The White House later said Trump was making a statement, not a proposal.</p>
<p>Kirk repeatedly denigrated minorities, calling transgender people an “abomination,” warning of “prowling Blacks” in cities, accusing wealthy Jews of stoking “hatred against Whites,” and declaring Islam incompatible with Western civilization. He also dismissed Pope Francis as a Marxist.</p>
<p>Some of those who spoke out against Kirk after his death said they were disturbed by the hagiography.</p>
<figure>Kimberly Hunt, a human resources worker in Arizona, was fired after posting a critical video message about Kirk. REUTERS/Caitlin O'Hara</figure>
<p>“I just felt compelled to remind people who he was and what he stood for,” Kimberly Hunt, a human resources worker in Arizona, said in an interview. She had posted a video captioned, “Save your tears for his victims, not him.”</p>
<p>In the video, Hunt cited Kirk’s record of using derogatory language about transgender people and Muslims, before adding that his children “are better off without him.” Hunt was fired soon after. Her employer, an Arizona construction firm, did not respond to requests for comment.</p>
<p>Hunt told Reuters she understood her words sounded harsh but stood by them. She said they reflected Kirk’s stance in a debate last year that if he had a 10-year-old daughter who was impregnated through rape, “the baby would be delivered.”</p>
<p>The retaliation has silenced many voices. Scores of people who posted anti-Kirk comments have since scrubbed or locked their accounts, Reuters found. Others said in interviews that they are pushing back.</p>
<p>Hunt said she has raised more than $88,000 from a GoFundMe campaign titled, “Doxxed, Fired, but Not Silenced.” She said she wants to use the money to further her education, become a content creator, and keep calling out people like Kirk.</p>
<p>“It’s definitely just emboldened me,” she said.</p>
<figure>Screenshot of a threatening message Kimberly Hunt received on Facebook. Photo and offensive language pixelated by Reuters.</figure>
<p>At least 19 lawsuits have been filed against employers who punished Kirk critics, state and federal court records show. At least two plaintiffs have succeeded, including an academic in South Dakota who got his teaching job back.</p>
<p>Karen Leader, an associate professor at Florida Atlantic University, took to social media after Kirk’s death to protest a narrative that he “was a shining inspiration to youth and a noncontroversial figure who just wanted to have open and civil dialogue,” she said. “Anyone who’s in higher education knows that it’s not that simple.”</p>
<p>She noted that Turning Point rose to prominence through its Professor Watchlist, a site that encouraged students to report faculty for allegedly holding “radical left” views or being a “terror supporter.”</p>
<p>Kirk had described the Watchlist as an awareness tool, not a blacklist. Those on it have said in interviews, social media posts and public forums that it fostered harassment and intimidation. In 2023, a Turning Point reporter was accused of assaulting an Arizona professor who was on the watchlist after confronting him on camera about his sexuality and shoving him to the ground. The reporter admitted to harassment, assault and disorderly conduct and was ordered to complete a diversion program. A Turning Point cameraman admitted to harassment in the case.</p>
<figure>Karen Leader, an associate professor of art history at Florida Atlantic University, was placed on administrative leave after she posted about Kirk on social media. REUTERS/Marco Bello</figure>
<p>On September 10, Leader began posting Kirk’s past statements on X. She said she made a mistake by incorrectly accusing Kirk of having uttered an ethnic slur and then deleted it. The rest of her posts she said she stands behind, including one highlighting Kirk’s claim that Black Americans were “better” during Jim Crow.</p>
<p>“None of it was me encouraging violence,” Leader said. “I was sharing evidence.”</p>
<p>A voicemail left in September for associate professor Karen Leader after she posted online about Kirk</p>
<p>In one voicemail reviewed by Reuters, the caller said: “We’re coming to get you. Karen Leader, we know where you work. We’re gonna come to your home as soon as we have your location.” Leader said she has rarely left her apartment since.</p>
<p>She reported the threats to Boca Raton police, which referred the case to campus officers, according to a police report. Florida Atlantic University police said their report could not be released because of an active criminal investigation.</p>
<p>Florida Atlantic University confirmed Leader was one of three academics who were on leave pending investigations. It declined further comment. Chamberlain also didn’t return an email seeking comment.</p>
<p>“Whether my career is over or not, I don’t know,” Leader said. “But my life has changed.”</p>
<p>Sign up <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/charlie-kirk-purge-how-600-americans-were-punished-pro-trump-crackdown-2025-11-19/undefined?location=article-paragraph&amp;redirectUrl=/investigations/charlie-kirk-purge-how-600-americans-were-punished-pro-trump-crackdown-2025-11-19/">here.</a></p>
<p>Additional reporting by Phil Stewart, Jana Winter, and Courtney Rozen in Washington and Isaac Vargas in Los Angeles. Edited by Jason Szep and Linda So.</p>
<p>Our Standards: <a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.thomsonreuters.com/en/about-us/trust-principles.html">The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles., opens new tab</a></p>
<p><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/authors/raphael-satter/">Raphael Satter</a></p>
<p>Thomson Reuters</p>
<p>Reporter covering cybersecurity, surveillance, and disinformation for Reuters. Work has included investigations into state-sponsored espionage, deepfake-driven propaganda, and mercenary hacking.</p>
<p><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/authors/a-j-vicens/">A.J. Vicens</a></p>
<p>Thomson Reuters</p>
<p>Cybersecurity correspondent covering cybercrime, nation-state threats, hacks, leaks and intelligence</p>
<p>Do you have a news tip?</p>
<p>How to contact Reuters securely</p>
<p><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/tips/">Contact us</a></p>
<h2>Read Next</h2>
<ul><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/how-reuters-tallied-trump-organizations-crypto-income-2025-10-28/">How Reuters tallied the Trump Organization’s crypto income</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/iran-russia-new-zealand-insurer-that-kept-their-sanctioned-oil-flowing-2025-10-28/">Iran, Russia and the New Zealand insurer that kept their sanctioned oil flowing</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/how-dark-fleet-tankers-helped-mexican-cartel-build-fuel-smuggling-empire-2025-10-22/">How a ‘dark fleet’ of tankers helped a Mexican cartel build a fuel-smuggling empire</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/">Worldcategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/assad-era-conspiracy-hide-thousands-dead-turned-syrias-remote-desert-into-mass-2025-10-17/">Assad-era conspiracy to hide thousands of dead turned Syria’s remote desert into a mass grave</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/witnesses-drone-colored-soil-how-reuters-confirmed-an-assad-plot-move-mass-grave-2025-10-20/">Witnesses, a drone and colored soil: How Reuters confirmed an Assad plot to move a mass grave</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/">Worldcategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/assad-government-secretly-moved-mass-grave-cover-up-killings-reuters-2025-10-14/">Exclusive: Assad government secretly moved mass grave to cover up killings</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/how-houthis-rule-yemen-prisons-personality-cult-pilfered-food-aid-2025-10-15/">How the Houthis rule in Yemen: prisons, a personality cult, and pilfered food aid</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/visual-evidence-upends-israels-official-story-deadly-attack-gaza-hospital-2025-09-26/">Visual evidence upends Israel’s official story for deadly attack on Gaza hospital</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/holy-war-how-russia-recruited-orthodox-priests-sway-moldovas-voters-2025-09-26/">Holy war: How Russia recruited Orthodox priests to sway Moldova’s voters</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/they-help-preserve-americas-dominance-pacific-theyre-paying-painful-price-2025-09-24/">This island helps preserve US dominance in the Pacific. Here's the price it's paying</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/syria-risks-rupturing-armed-camps-face-off-across-euphrates-2025-09-19/">Syria risks rupturing as armed camps face off across the Euphrates</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/china-is-sending-its-world-beating-auto-industry-into-tailspin-2025-09-17/">China is sending its world-beating auto industry into a tailspin</a></li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/">Worldcategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/world/we-set-out-craft-perfect-phishing-scam-major-ai-chatbots-were-happy-help-2025-09-15/">We set out to craft the perfect phishing scam. Major AI chatbots were happy to help.</a></li></ul>
<h2><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigations​</a></h2>
<ul><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/charlie-kirk-purge-how-600-americans-were-punished-pro-trump-crackdown-2025-11-19/">The Charlie Kirk purge: How 600 Americans were punished in a pro-Trump crackdown</a>11:00 AM UTC</li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/googles-top-ai-executive-seeks-profound-over-profits-prosaic-2025-11-13/">Google’s top AI executive seeks the profound over profits and the “prosaic”</a>November 13, 2025</li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/trump-20-maga-aligned-influencers-media-emerge-new-mainstream-2025-11-08/">In Trump 2.0, MAGA-aligned influencers and media emerge as the new mainstream</a>November 8, 2025</li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/meta-is-earning-fortune-deluge-fraudulent-ads-documents-show-2025-11-06/">Meta is earning a fortune on a deluge of fraudulent ads, documents show</a>November 6, 2025</li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/scientists-try-prove-link-between-amazon-gold-mining-disabilities-babies-2025-11-01/">Scientists try to prove link between Amazon gold mining and disabilities in babies</a>November 1, 2025</li><li><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/">Investigationscategory</a><a href="https://archive.is/o/F4t7b/https://www.reuters.com/investigations/narrow-pacific-waterway-is-heart-us-plans-choke-chinas-vast-navy-2025-10-31/">A narrow Pacific waterway is at the heart of US plans to choke China’s vast navy</a>October 31, 2025</li></ul>
