---
author: Elizabeth Sandifer
cover_image: 'https://www.patreon.com/meta-image/post/152176916'
date: '2026-03-09T16:08:33.665Z'
dateFolder: 2026/03/09
description: Get more from Elizabeth Sandifer and Penn on Patreon
isBasedOn: 'https://www.patreon.com/posts/lwia-4-5-coda-152176916'
link: 'https://www.patreon.com/posts/lwia-4-5-coda-152176916'
slug: 2026-03-09-httpswwwpatreoncompostslwia-4-5-coda-152176916
tags:
  - comics
title: Elizabeth Sandifer and Penn
---
<p>It is my absolute pleasure to offer my Patrons this 5,500 word coda to my chapter on Alan Moore's early magical work, which explores a surprising aspect of that work that has gone entirely undiscussed in the thirty years since Moore undertook it.</p>
<p>I would politely as that, while you should feel free to link this piece and urge anyone you think would be interested in it to back the Patreon, you do not discuss the specific topic of it until it goes live on the site on May 31st.</p>
<p>It is, however, entirely understandable why Moore was so concerned with the matter of sanity. This is aptly demonstrated by another performance Moore gave during the period, some six months prior to <em>The Birth Caul</em>. The nature of this performance is unusual. <em>The Moon and Serpent Bumper Book of Magic</em> enumerates five “Moon and Serpent manifestations,” all listed with their CD covers: <em>The Moon and Serpent Grand Egyptian Theatre of Marvels</em>, <em>The Birth Caul</em>, and a trio of three later performances: 1997’s <em>The Highbury Working</em>, 1999’s <em>Snakes and Ladders</em>, and 2001’s <em>Angel Passage</em>. But on May 27th, 1995 Moore appeared at the Virtual Futures conference, organized by the Cybernetic Culture Research Unit at the University of Warwick, to give a sixth, largely unacknowledged magical performance.</p>
<p>Technically speaking the CCRU did not form until October, a few months after the conference. This infelicity of chronology, however, is part for the course for the group, whose website (which the one quasi-official collection of CCRU writings notes “has flickered in and out of existence over the last decade (or more), without anyone in the old Ccru circle fully—or even tentatively—grasping how this facility has been sustained, or accepting responsibility for its preservation”) notes that “the question of ‘the’ history of the Ccru is problematic, not least because Ccru activity is characterised by its antagonism towards stable temporality.” One of the core concepts of the CCRU is hyperstition, which is to say an idea that brings about its own realization, not unlike Moore’s contention about the universe’s creation in <em>The Moon and Serpent Grand Egyptian Theatre of Marvels</em>. As the CCRU itself puts it, the group “retroactively triggers itself from October 1995, using a UK University as a temporary habitat.” In which case it would be more accurate to say that the 1995 Virtual Futures conference was one of the (fir/la)st precursors that the CCRU retroactively created to enable itself. (“And people call me weird,” scoffed William Blake in a 5043 seance.)</p>
<p>The unsettlingly vexed question of chronology aside, the CCRU was an avant garde collective emanating out of the University of Warwick’s philosophy department, initially under the guidance of Sadie Plant. On one level it was an effort to meld the work of continental philosophers like Foucault, Lyotard, and Deleuze with the then ascendent aesthetic movement of cyberpunk. On another it was an explosive demonstration of philosophy as performance art. When the music journalist Simon Reynolds visited to write a profile on them they greeted him with a reenactment of one of their previous works in which he was seated among three boomboxes. As he describes it, “The first cassette-player issues a looped cycle of words that resembles an incantation or spell. From the second machine comes a text recited in a baleful deadpan by a female American voice—not a presentation but a sort of prose poem, full of imagery of ‘swarmachines’ and ‘strobing centipede flutters.’ The third ghettoblaster emits what could either be Stockhausen-style electroacoustic composition or the pizzicato, mandible-clicking music of the insect world. Later, I find out it’s a human voice that’s been synthetically processed, with all the vowels removed to leave just consonants and fricatives.” At conferences this sort of thing was typically accompanied by video projections just to make the entire thing more sensorily overwhelming.</p>
<p>The CCRU’s actual affiliation with the University of Warwick was brief, bordering on non-existent. Some eighteen months after its retroactive triggering Sadie Plant quit academia, and the university, by this point spectacularly alarmed by its output, wound it down in 1998. Instead of ceasing to exist—inasmuch as it ever had—it decamped eight miles down the A46 to quarters above a Body Shop in Leamington Spa, with many of its members taking up residence in the house where Aleister Crowley was born. This was largely par for the course for the group, which was openly occultist, discussing things like lemurian time sorcery while contemplating a quasi-kabbalistic diagram called the decimal numogram or establishing a hermetic society called the Architectonic Order of the Eschaton. All of this was part of a philosophical practice that would eventually become known as accelerationism—the belief that the correct thing to do with the future is to bring it about as quickly as possible. It is a philosophical movement aptly captured in Warren Ellis’s 2015 series <em>Injection,</em> in which a group transparently based on the CCRU, the Cultural Cross-Contamination Unit (organized by Lowlands University and headquartered above a chip shop), attempts to “accelerate the future” and make the 21st century more interesting by injecting a magically fueled artificial intelligence into the Internet, which ends up instead unleashing a string of bizarre cosmic horrors onto the world.</p>
<p>The 1995 Virtual Futures conference presented itself in slightly less esoteric terms than the CCRU itself ultimately would. Its call for papers, which already lists Moore’s participation (along with that of David J, though his move to LA ultimately scuppered his involvement), described it as "an interdisciplinary event that examines the role of cybernetic and specifically dissipative or non-linear models in the arts, sciences, and philosophy,” while its program offered the slightly more representative declaration that “We have gathered you here this weekend to bury the 20th century &amp; begin work on the 21st. We are children of the 21st century &amp; live already in the future unknown, uncovering every day vast new landscapes for exploration” and proposes that “any post-nietzchean, post-marxist, or post-wittgensteinian philosophy is based on experimentation, &amp; so we offer ourselves up to you as your laboratory for the weekend. And you are our lab rats…”</p>
<p>Ironically, given how unrepentantly weird the CCRU was, Moore’s account of his presentation in the conference program is positively timid in its framing. Scheduled third on a panel entitled Occult Cyberspace, his panel description positions his work as the result of “various experiments in emulating ‘magical’ archaic worldviews in the hopes that they might allow different insights into our contemporary situation” and says that he’ll “attempt to blur both the archaic and poetic concept of what we call evocation, using poetry as a material substance through which the etheric, insubstantial essence of the deity might manifest itself.” It’s plain that Moore is trying here to sand the roughest edges off of his magical practice, rendering it something acceptable to an academic audience, which is sensible enough until one looks at the presentation by Fredd Evans immediately before his, entitled “Kill a Queer for Christ Day 1993,” whose description reads:</p>
<p>I can feel them closing in, matching our every move for move our cover is blown, they've seen our smarteen innocence for the lack of conscience that it is (come up with your hands out) and opened fire. everything, seems to be going according to plan, Elvis, resplendent in her best green smock (to minimise reflection) stands centre stage yelling instructions to everyone waggling her stumps in time the music, adjusting the stirrups when the mood takes her. Jill's sealed off the corridors around the operating theatre for added security, I can hear her pacing along outside making obscene suggestions to the hostages at regular intervals and, owing to his relatively strong stomach and intrinsic schadenfreude Ivan has his arm jammed half-way up the patient trying to retrieve the device, an unforeseen event but the matter is in good hands. my god, he keeps giggling to himself, its full of stars. for me, I can't say I know much about anaesthetics, but checking the patient; I can see that having survived the in-flight lustration she's still breathing and dosed to the gills, so yeah, all things considered—I think we're doing remarkably well.</p>
<p>But while Moore is pitching himself more sanely his presentation still plainly fits with the overall vibe. The deity he proposes to evoke is the God of Television, who he will allow “to speak through human lips, using the poet as trance medium to broadcast its divine transmissions. In America, they call it ‘channelling.’ In this instance, that's as precise a definition of the work as one might hope for.”</p>
<p>A lone account of this exists, from a fanzine writer going by the mononym of “Jael” and preserved on a fansite for cyberpunk writer and fellow presenter Pat Cadigan, and it’s clear from it that Moore’s presentation took the same broad approach as in <em>The Moon and Serpent Grand Egyptian Theatre of Marvels</em>. Jael describes how Moore and his unidentified musician (presumably Tim Perkins) “mount a row of huge candles before the table and put out all of the overhead lights, leaving candlelight and the glow of television screens, tuned to noise. The ‘music’ is a low, modulated electronic drone. The piece is an invocation/evocation of the Nemon, the ancient Egyptian god of television. If you've ever heard the voice of Alan Moore you know how thunderous he is. At four feet from his amplifiers he is even more massive. A powerful rhythmic rant on the God which has commanded more worship than any in history. ‘We give him our sexual juices...he enters our eyes, uses eyelids as lips... then he takes our children.’ By the end I am holding one hand in the other and shaking. At the throbbing climax, I shriek and slam my hands together, incredible, utterly amazing.”</p>
<p>Several things about this are slightly confusing. The title of Moore’s presentation, <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em>—is a known piece in his ouvre. It’s a short story published in October 1995 in Nancy Collins and Ed Kramer’s horror anthology <em>Forbidden Acts </em>and later adapted as a comic book by Avatar Press. More to the point, there are several discrepancies between what Jael describes and the known text. The name “Nemon” (presumably a portmanteau of neon and demon) appears nowhere in it, nor is the God of Television within it associated with Egypt (although Moore’s description in the Virtual Futures program briefly mentions Egypt as an example of one of the “archaic” worldviews he is trying to emulate). Nor do any of the quotes Jael provides appear in the piece, though similar phrases do appear. The possibility thus exists that the text Moore read in Warwick differs from the known version of <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em>. More likely, however, Jael simply misremembered things a bit, and Moore’s performance consisted of a dramatic reading of the extant text.</p>
<p>Save a cryptic opening paragraph in which the narrating television god (not yet identified as such anywhere save the program) explains that “sometimes in the dot and dazzle I forget myself,” the opening 20% or so of <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em> is spent with the narrator inhabiting the character of Maureen Cooper. “Character,” in this case, is literal—Moore introduces her by saying that “My name is Maureen Cooper. I am being played by Carol Livesey.” Maureen is a character on a barely veiled <em>Coronation Street</em> knockoff, <em>Jubilee Terrace</em>. Moore recounts her history—arriving as a rebellious bombshell but aging over fifteen years of wild plot twists into the comforting figure of the barkeep at the local pub. But there’s an unsettling undertone to the whole thing above and beyond that opening paragraph and the basic oddness of narrating from the perspective of a fictional character who’s conscious of the fact that she’s portrayed by an actress. There’s a series of asides addressing the audience as in the description of Maureen’s first appearance. “Oh, that skirt. Crash-helmet spun from platinum her hair. White PVC her boots. You are no longer competent to judge if real-life women ever dressed like this,” and subsequently, “You all know girls like me. You are no longer competent to judge if you know girls like me or not.” And the details the narrator chooses to focus on are not merely odd but unearthly. When another character, Bob Walmsley, enters, the narrator describes how “in his plaid jacket, checkered grey on grey, brief sparks of interference-white are flickering,” while in initially describing the pub Moore lingers on “the cancer-diamond of an ashtray, scrying-glass revealing nothing save for nuclear ruin, post-volcanic future landscapes briefly glimpsed in sooted crystal; die-cut cardboard coasters, sodden, separating at their corners into epidermal layers; blasoned with the label crests of piss-insipid beers, a heraldry of vomit, washroom fights, and incapacitated sex.”</p>
<p>Eventually the tension winds to its breaking point. Maureen spills a beer and looks “down to where the spilled beer must be pooling on the floor behind the bar, except there is no floor. Above my knees and just below the sharp hem of my skirt, the substance of the world melts into a pellucid fog, legs gone, the lower reaches of the bar transformed into a scintillant photo-electric vapour; out of camera.” The narrator remembers its true form in “the mad, consuming knowledge of apotheosis” and explodes into light, its laughter “a deafening ocean of dead radios” as it consumes the world of <em>Jubilee Terrace</em>, and the piece gets down to its true intentions: an account of the God of Television. Perhaps unsurprisingly, it is a mad, capricious thing. It boasts of how it “shrank the mountains and the jungles; shrank whole wars and brought them unto you in bottles” and how “on my altars human time is gladly sacrificed, whole lives evaporated in my pure and glimmering heat,” luxuriating in the pleasures of apocalypse, which is to gods “our noblest sport. It is our right.”</p>
<p>As is usually Moore’s way with pieces like this he offers a potted history of television, beginning with the hyperstitional fore-echoes of a 1919 paper by early psychoanalyst Viktor Tausk exploring a common schizophrenic delusion of being controlled by some outside device that Tausk deems the “Influencing Machine” that beams alien thoughts into their heads, noting that patients described “visions emanating from a small black box, flat images devoid of depth imprinting foreign notions and experience upon the target mind.” From here he traces the history through John Logie Baird’s actual invention of television in 1926, the establishment of the BBC in 1932, the coverage of George VI’s coronation, and then its passage into the uncertain interregnum of the early 1940s when all television transmissions were halted for the war. “The last transmission, made at noon,” he notes, “is Mickey Mopuse; a spiky and demonic creature quite unlike his later incarnations, striding through a flash-specked hell of dressed and lipsticked beasts, his inky foetus eye all pupil, squeaky mania of amphetamine amongst the catastrophic avalanche of sight-gag, sound effect and shuddering line. This is the sight I close my eye upon, surrendering to death of light and mind for the duration; all my shining, ghostly world of thought compressed into a hot and dwindling phosphor bead receding through unguessable imaginary distances, away into the flat dark glass.”</p>
<p>The God awakens into the post-war boom of late capitalism, the dream of infinite, eternal growth fueled by a consumer society. “The only difficulty,” it muses, “lies in the location of some great infernal engine that might fire the cogs of public purse to urgent, jingling life and start this economic prayer-wheel turning; some intense and occult jewel of power to set within the ring of holy numbers where they hope to raise up their self-birthing monetary miracle.” And so television is set to work building that society, depicted as a blurring collage of brand and logo: “June Allyson and Betty Crocker tumble by, the mingled newsreel godglow of Bikini Atoll tests erupting from their aprons. Slogans hurtle past, eternal and inane, the orbit-junk of inner space. Let Hertz put Speedy Alka-Seltzer in the Camel that I dreamed I walked a mile for in my Maidenform Bra, promising her anything but giving her Aprege and wondering where the yellow went in Miller Country where nine out of ten blindfolded housewives simply could not tell the difference; they check in, but they don’t check out.”</p>
<p>It boasts of its pervasiveness—hundreds of millions of TVs all over the planet, with the average person watching for four hours a day. “In all this planet’s history has any god enjoyed such dedication? Every night one hundred thousand years of human time is swallowed in my stare.” But moreover, it boasts of its control. “Can you feel me?,” it threatens. “In your gradual loss of self, in the erasure of all personal experience and all unique perception does there come a moment’s flair of panic when you know my neon breath against your cheek?” This ominous libidinousness only intensifies in the piece’s closing sections until the God speaks of “the Bairdo where the image-husks of dead folk live and dance and copulate forever, endless photo-necrophilia in sparkling freefall,” and bids the audience to “come naked and come all that I may penetrate you in your billions at a single instant, for I crave your soft fellatio of eyelid lips, the hot, deep, sucking warmth of socket throat upon me” until they are joined into its vast and singular mind where “the voices of the dead are muttering nonsense in the white void after closedown and my kingdom is announced, a cold flame on your eye; my constant, dog-shrill whistle in your private heart, brightness immortal and the end of care, coming up next, right after this…”</p>
<p>Unlike his other two magical performances in this period, Moore has never released an audio version of <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em>. Moreover, he’s not acknowledged its status as a magical performance. Gary Spencer Millidge’s <em>Alan Moore: Storyteller</em> volume treats it as a short story and lists only its publication in <em>Forbidden Acts. </em>The subsequent Avatar version similarly makes no mention of its past life as a piece of ritual magic. Only George Khoury’s admirably thorough bibliography in the back of <em>The Extraordinary Works of Alan Moore</em> acknowledges his appearance at the conference. Moore has never spoken about the trip in interviews, nor even mentioned <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em> save for a lone 2009 interview where he mentions the impending comics adaptation and notes that “I think they’ve done a really good job.” Why should this be?</p>
<p>One possibility is that Moore did not consider it a proper magical performance, or did not ultimately rate <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em> as a major piece. It’s true that <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em> was an existing text that Moore reworked into a performance piece as opposed to a bespoke magical working. , and thus unlike the canonical Moon and Serpent manifestations it did not originate in a magical ritual. But this undersells the plain magical significance of the piece, which Moore finished only about two weeks after his January 7th initiatory experience, in the same fizzing haze that birthed “Hair of the Snake that Bit Me” and “Town of Lights.” Moreover, he rated the piece highly enough to print only a single copy before deleting the computer file so that he could offer the original up as a sacrifice—an honor that eventually went to the Asmodeus painting. This was plainly not a minor work.</p>
<p>Another possibility is that he ultimately decided the piece was out of keeping with the Moon and Serpent canon. The five works released on CD are all basically optimistic pieces, offering their listener some measure of magical wisdom. In contrast, <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em> is a plain horror piece that ends in a sexual and apocalyptic frenzy. Had he released it on CD it would have been a clear outlier among pieces like <em>The Birth Caul</em> and <em>The Moon and Serpent Grand Egyptian Theatre of Marvels</em>. But Moore released an audio version of the similarly bleak <em>Brought to Light</em>, and so this would only serve to explain why it is not a canonical manifestation, not why the audio has never been released. And neither explanation explains the baffling silence about the performance—the soft disavowal of having ever channeled this deranged god.</p>
<p>A more compelling explanation is that Moore ultimately concluded that something had gone fundamentally wrong with the magic he worked in Warwick. Or perhaps more broadly, that something had gone fundamentally wrong with the Virtual Futures conference at large. It is not clear whether Moore attended any of the other sessions that weekend, although it’s difficult to imagine him passing up the screening of short films earlier in the day on Saturday that included <em>One Eno</em>, a twenty-two minute documentary featuring Brian Eno talking to his dog. But if he did he’d surely have considered the “January 1, 2001” panel on Sunday afternoon, which featured a quartet of performance pieces including one by Zero-K, a two piece collective consisting of CCRU founder Sadie Plant and her partner Nick Land.</p>
<p>Certainly if Moore would have heard of Land if he’d done even a modicum of looking into the Virtual Futures event. Land was one of the major players in the formation of the CCRU, taking over its leadership after Plant’s departure. More to the point at the previous year’s conference he proved the star of the show with his paper “Meltdown,” arguably the single most important piece of writing to emerge from the CCRU. Its swerving blend of philosophy and cyberpunk was in many regards the type specimen for the entire CCRU genre and scene. “The story goes like this,” it begins. “Earth is captured by a technocapital singularity as renaissance rationalitization and oceanic navigation lock into commoditization take-off. Logistically accelerating techno-economic interactivity crumbles social order in auto-sophisticating machine runaway.” The story that follows is one of global cataclysm—waves of war and destruction that send his technocapital intelligence into overdrive. “Converging upon terrestrial meltdown singularity, phase-out culture accelerates through its digitech-heated adaptive landscape, passing through compression thresholds normed to an intensive logistic curve: 1500, 1756, 1884, 1948, 1980, 1996, 2004, 2008, 2010, 2011...</p>
<p>Nothing human makes it out of the near-future.”</p>
<p>No record of his and Plant’s 1995 presentation, entitled “Smearing Systems,” exists, but the program description suggests something along similar lines. “Identity is virtually extinct. The security systems familiar to modernity—nuclear, stable, &amp; protective—are smearing into disruptive interference patterns. Orphaned by cybernetic culture, planetary technocapitalism’s twisted offspring scramble generational order, fatally blurring the boundaries of race, nation, class &amp; sexuality.” The result, as usual, is apocalypse and extinction: “Out in the jungle tracts of the near future, humanity is just a phase.”</p>
<p>Much of the language employed here is familiar from Land’s other writing around the time—he is the sort of academic who favored a measure of self-plagiarism. In the program description he proclaims that “Socialism was the last hope for mankind, but that’s all over now,” whereas in another conference paper from 1995 entitled “No Future” he goes with “Modernity invented the future, but that’s all over.” That one ends with a second coming as horror beat in which “It is 2011 and monocrat New Jerusalem approaches climax, directing retrochronal counter-insurgency sweeps down into the jungle, where space programmes subside into the inertia of myth. The ultimate dream of anthropomorphic power hurtles towards its immaculate conception, whilst the robot slaves of phallic order bleat adoration. Jesus wants you for a meat puppet.” But everything he writes is this same sort of cyberpunk death orgasm of approaching human annihilation.</p>
<p>This is, it must be noted, not all that far from what Moore does in <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em>. Moore and Land are plainly on the same wavelength here. But there remains something slightly off-kilter about Moore’s work in this context. Land’s apocalypse is a murderous but gleaming science fiction future overtly rooted in the notion of computers and machine intelligence. Moore, however, is finding his apocalypse in a seventy year old piece of technology that, in practice, was in the last days of its pomp, about to decline into the atomization of cable and streaming that disconnect the mad god from the collective worship of broadcast. It is, in the context of this post-Burroughsian yammering about how “Immersion presupposes amnesia and conversion to tractile memory, with the ana/ cata axis supplementing tri-dimensional intraspatial movement with a variable measure of immersion,” almost quaintly old-fashioned. Indeed, this sense permeates Moore’s contributions to the conference. While the learned astronomers raced into the looming apocalypse Moore finds himself in the program musing about how “a form of temporal chauvanism is inherent in the way we view the cultures that preceded ours; the way they lived and how they saw the world,” rueing the way that “we constantly make the assumption that these other, earlier notions of reality are inherently <em>inferior</em> to our own.” It’s a perfectly reasonable line of thought, but it’s also a familiar one engaged in debates that the Deleuze-fueled graduate students organizing the Virtual Futures conference would have outgrown half a decade earlier in their academic careers.</p>
<p>But perhaps the more pertinent observation is simply that, unlike Nick Land, Alan Moore didn’t want to end the world and destroy humanity. That he would ever consider such a thing is unthinkable with even a moment’s consideration of the man. Perhaps, then, the reason that he quietly disavowed the magical aspects of <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em> is simply that he realized the sort of larger ritual work he was contributing to in that moment and wanted as little to do with it as he apparently does Eddie Campbell’s ghastly recoloring of <em>From Hell</em>.</p>
<p>Of course, he could also have just taken the hour’s train ride back to Northampton that evening. He wouldn’t have had to stay long to realize the event was a bit of a shitshow—a plenary session on Saturday night about “Future Music,” pitched as an exploration of techno music as something that “in its many hybrid forms is training humans to navigate the machinic future” dissolved into chaos five minutes in when an audience member stormed out shouting “you’re talking bollocks!” If so, it’s probably for the best that he missed Land’s presentation, which was a disaster. A writeup of the conference in <em>Internet and Comms Today</em>, which quotes a rapturous graduate student proclaiming Land “the cleverest man in the UK,” describes a lights out presentation delivered over a soundtrack of techno music in which, as they put it, “none of the speakers had yet evolved sufficiently to be able to see in the dark and couldn’t read their script” and “no one could hear anything anyway,” although they report one half-caught of dialogue about “masturbating machines replacing real intercourse, social and sexual, no longer alienation—but alien.” (Jael, in contrast, notes that Moore and his collaborator “set up their own system” and were “fast and professional.”)</p>
<p>This was largely in keeping with how things went for Land over the ensuing few years. The CCRU was not exclusively a cult of personality around Land, but that is certainly one of the things it ever was, especially by the point where it had withdrawn to Crowley’s house in Leamington Spa. And in the years that followed his exposure to Television’s death-light things began going downhill for him. His writing grows increasingly esoteric—literally so, retreating entirely from the confines of anything recognizable as academic philosophy into sprays of glossolalia as he and his acolytes derive increasingly incoherent gematria of the apocalypse. A former student, Iain Hamilton Grant, recounts that in the later days of his academic career “it could be grim going in there, once he started living in his office. There would be a tower of Pot Noodles and underwear drying on the radiator, which he had washed in the staff loos.” He made increasingly wild claims in his work, suggesting he was an android sent back in time from the future to destroy “the human security system” and reporting his possession by a variety of entities with names like Cur, Vauung, and Can Sah. Eventually he went legitimately mad, no longer competent to judge whether he was laying out the Kabbalistic framework of H.P. Lovecraft’s mythology or just typing wave after wave of drug-addled gibberish.</p>
<p>It is impossible not to notice the broad similarities to Moore, especially given that Land’s mysticism, like Moore, was fueled by drug use. One of the most striking things about David J’s accounts of doing magic with Moore is little more than a long string of drug talk. In one, Moore begins reading from <em>Cerebus</em> while repeatedly peppering Haskins with the question “what are you thinking about?” Later Haskins begins painting Moore’s walls with a concocted mixture of cough medicine, tea, and sugar, pouring the leftovers into a hollow crevice in <em>The</em> <em>Book of Copulations</em> as Moore observes that “it has a sticky heart.” In another they find grave significance in the fact that Haskins observed a “fractal quality” to the music at around the same time Moore was thinking about his cigarette smoke. By and large Moore’s magical practice appeared to have involved getting high and having wrestling matches with invisible demons. The question of sanity hangs ominously over all of it.</p>
<p>There are, however, several crucial differences as well. For one, Land’s drug of choice was amphetamines, which he abused freely in the spirit of pledging himself “unreservedly to evil and insanity.” This is very different from a psilocybin habit that Moore came to recognize as a crutch over time. For another, Moore never succumbed to the fatal temptation of cult leadership, whereas Land, by his own admission, preyed freely upon women, using them “as means to an end, and the end was the ruin of the soul” whilst running a cult out of Aleister Crowley’s old house. But perhaps the most important difference is simply that Alan Moore wrote things like <em>From Hell</em>, <em>The Birth Caul</em>, and a bevy of pleasantly stupid superhero comics while Nick Land wrote incoherent drivel before moving to China and becoming a fascist. As Moore, quoting Crowley, noted to Dave Sim, “the only difference between a schizophrenic and myself is that I’m not mad.”</p>
<p>None of this, however, serves to explain Moore’s strange burial of <em>Light of Thy Countenance</em>’s magical aspects. For this it is perhaps more useful to specify the magic that actually went on in performing <em>Light of Thy Countenance </em>as a literal invocation. Moore may have summoned the mad God of Television, but he did not worship the thing. He worshipped a snake puppet; the God of Television was only ever a warning, hence his framing in the program as an attempt to imagine what pre-rational cultures might have thought of television. Land locates the starting point for the technocapital singularity in the Age of Reason. But Moore’s magic is rooted far earlier in human development, in the very notion of language and representation. The mad God of Television is an alarming monster, yes. But it was one Moore understood perfectly well how to bind.</p>
<p>Indeed, it seems worth noting that Land’s occult turn came in the wake of the 1995 Virtual Futures conference. While on balance Moore likely missed Land’s talk, the odds are much higher that Land attended Moore’s, which was one of the marquee attractions, scheduled in a prime pre-dinner slot in the largest room the conference had. Was Land’s occult collapse into madness inspired by what he saw there? Three interesting data points seem worth reporting. First, the 1996 edition of the Virtual Futures Conference, which saw Land lying on the floor offering a disorienting glossolalia over a jungle soundtrack whilst writhing around in what one account describes as a “snake-becoming.” Second, in a piece dating from his post-madness period, Land once coined the existence of a new god, one proposed as a compromise between the atheist/rationalist and religious fundamentalist wings of the fascist movement he was by then a part of. Land proposes “The God of Nature, or perhaps Nature,” abbreviated to “Gnon,” a name that, in the fashion of self-unpacking angel language Moore posits in <em>Jerusalem</em>, would seem trivially to transform into that of Glycon. Finally there is the matter of <em>Fanged Noumena</em>, a 2011 collection that serves as the largest compendium of Land’s writing. For its cover image the editors selected a work by the Blake-inflected painters Jake and Dinos Chapman from their series <em>Disasters of War IV. </em>The series depicts a variety of unsettling horrors, but in the specific image chosen, amidst the inscrutably mutilated bodies and the strange figure whose face consists of nothing save for a single, giant eye stands a man with long hair and beard. The effect is to bind Land’s entire intellectual career—all his dreams of cyberpunk apocalypse—within the gaze of an at worst mildly alarmed Alan Moore.</p>
<p>The final event scheduled at the Virtual Futures conference, on Sunday evening, was a plenary discussion inviting participants “for an open forum to discuss the future.” Indeed the panel was simply named The Future. Except that, as <em>Internet and Comms Today</em> notes, the session never happened. When all was said and done the future imagined by the CCRU was cancelled. Perhaps the reason Moore never pursued the magic further was that it had already done its job.</p>
<figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><h2>9 comments</h2>
<figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure><figure></figure>
