---
author: By Brianna Sacks
cover_image: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-apps/imrs.php?src=https://arc-anglerfish-washpost-prod-washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/QUD5NA52MZC3FJD7JZ6HXZBYD4.jpg&w=1440
date: '2025-08-27T17:29:08.532Z'
dateFolder: 2025/08/27
description: >-
  Disaster-aid groups said the new contracts would make it harder for nonprofits
  to help the most vulnerable Americans in the aftermath of a disaster.
isBasedOn: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/weather/2025/08/27/dhs-fema-undocumented-immigrants-aid-groups-grants/
link: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/weather/2025/08/27/dhs-fema-undocumented-immigrants-aid-groups-grants/
slug: >-
  2025-08-27-httpswwwwashingtonpostcomweather20250827dhs-fema-undocumented-immigrants-aid-groups-grants
tags:
  - politics
  - baselines
  - immigration
title: >-
  DHS moves to bar aid groups from serving undocumented immigrants - The
  Washington Post
---
<p>Disaster-aid groups said the new contracts would make it harder for nonprofits to help the most vulnerable Americans in the aftermath of a disaster.</p>
<p>The Department of Homeland Security is now barring states and volunteer groups that receive government funds from helping undocumented immigrants, according to a Washington Post analysis of updated guidelines and interviews with Federal Emergency Management Agency employees. The new rules also require groups to cooperate with immigration officials and enforcement operations.</p>
<p>Several disaster-assistance groups, FEMA employees and emergency management experts said the new requirements in the department’s fiscal 2025 aid contracts would make it harder for nonprofits to help the most vulnerable Americans in the aftermath of a disaster. Some members of the national volunteer disaster group network also questioned whether the new requirements are constitutional and point out that they seem to violate some local and state laws that prevent asking about a person’s immigration status.</p>
<p>By accepting the federal grants and awards, the new documents state, volunteer organizations that help after disasters must agree to not “operate any program that benefits illegal immigrants or incentivizes illegal immigration.”</p>
<p>That could put groups that provide food, housing, mental health support and other assistance in disaster-stricken states in the position of having to verify aid recipients legal status before providing assistance, experts said.</p>
<p>“There is no historical context for this,” said Scott Robinson, an emergency management expert and FEMA historian who teaches at Arizona State University. “The notion that the federal government would use these operations for surveillance is entirely new territory.”</p>
<p>The affected contractors include faith-based groups and nonprofits such as the Salvation Army and Red Cross, which states usually rely on to set up shelters and deliver basic assistance. They <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2024/10/17/hurricane-helene-latinos-north-carolina/">often serve communities with large Latino populations</a>, where people often have trouble getting federal aid because they are uninsured or live in multigenerational households so they can’t all apply to FEMA. They serve those who have lost their homes or incomes after a catastrophic event but are not in the United States legally. Such humanitarian organizations typically do not ask about religion, beliefs, political affiliation or documentation status when offering aid.</p>
<p>The federal government first awards funds to states, which then bring in organizations once they have accepted the contract and its rules. The DHS document states an award recipient, such as a state, must make all contractors and sub-recipients follow its terms.</p>
<p>In a statement, acting FEMA press secretary Daniel Llargues said any recipient of a DHS or FEMA grant “is required to follow the DHS Standard Terms &amp; Conditions,” noting most funding is awarded directly to states, tribes and territories.</p>
<p>Another new section of the document states all award recipients must comply with federal statues that prohibit state and local governments from keeping information about a person’s immigration status from DHS. They are also barred from “harboring, concealing, or shielding from detection illegal aliens;” have to agree to “provide access to detainees, such as when an immigration officer seeks to interview a person who might be a removable alien;” and not leak or publicize an enforcement operation.</p>
<p>“This is likely to have a chilling effect on any undocumented person” seeking assistance, Robinson said, adding that it might even deter someone who fears their legal status may be questioned.</p>
<p>While the federal government has always had wide-ranging authority when setting conditions for grants, a review of contracts going back to 2016, the first year they were posted, found past DHS contracts for federal assistance have not had any language about undocumented immigrants. One FEMA official said the new regulations move away from past terms that focused on civil rights and “place more emphasis on exclusionary powers the government has.”</p>
<p>These standards are not just limited to nonprofits, but could apply to all applicants, sub-applicants and even other federal agencies that work with FEMA, such as search and rescue groups, said a former senior FEMA official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the matter.</p>
<p>Officials at disaster volunteer organizations across the U.S., many of whom embed all across communities after major hurricanes, floods or fires, said they were caught off guard by the new conditions. Several members raised concerns that federal contracts cannot make nonprofits violate local laws that protect people’s privacy. The bulk of disaster-volunteer groups that work with the federal government are also faith-based organizations, which some groups said could create constitutional concerns.</p>
<p>“We see this as a Free Exercise issue under our First Amendment rights,” said Peter Gudaitis, the executive director of New York Disaster Interfaith Services. “First, the federal government has never attempted to tell the nonprofit sector who we can and cannot serve. Further, as a faith-based organization we have the right to determine who we serve.”</p>
<p>The new terms and conditions also target diversity, equity and inclusion policies, stating that the department’s awards cannot be used “to advance or promote DEI and/or DEIA (diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility) or discriminatory equity ideology.”</p>
<p>To meet the needs of the communities they serve, nonprofits often hire Spanish-speakers and people of color, and Gudaitis and other members of the nation’s disaster-volunteer network questioned whether the anti-DEI provision would affect this approach.</p>
<p>There are states and cities that don’t allow such organizations to ask about a person’s immigration status. In New York, for example, disaster workers can register anyone in any impacted Zip code regardless if they are a citizen or not.</p>
<p>These groups, represented by a broader umbrella group called National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster, are grappling with the new requirements, said the Rev. David Guadalupe, the organizations’ interim president who also runs Puerto Rico’s volunteer-disaster-aid group. Each group will have to make an independent decision as to whether they can and will abide by these terms when a state asks them to assist, he said. That could put many groups in a very difficult position, he said, and goes against an ethos to serve anyone in need.</p>
<p>“Their shared mission is to serve all disasters’ survivors with compassion and dignity, especially those most vulnerable, and to work together to help communities recover,” he said.</p>
<p>The network reached out to the administration on Monday about the new terms and is awaiting a reply, Guadalupe said. It is hosting a town hall next week to discuss the new policy and how its members “will proactively prepare for impacts” on the funds they rely on to manage disasters, according to an email obtained by The Post.</p>
<p>These groups often work with states through FEMA’s Disaster Case Management Program. In its description of the program, DHS <a href="https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2022-06/privacy-pia-fema056-adcmp-june2022.pdf">notes</a>, “without federal support, the state may be inundated and unable to address the size and scope of the needs or unable to sustain the length of time the services are needed.”</p>
<p>There are already strict rules surrounding federal assistance that states and subrecipients, such as volunteer groups and nonprofits, have to follow. These entities have to cooperate with compliance reviews and investigations; they are audited several times a year; and, according to the conditions, have to give “DHS access to examine and copy records, accounts, and other documents and sources of information related to the federal award and permit access to facilities and personnel.”</p>
<p>If a state rejects these conditions, an agency official explained, it would be ineligible for FEMA funds.</p>
<p>Nonprofits and disaster response groups worry that the terms could have a ripple effect on mixed-status households, where the parents might be undocumented but their children are citizens, which means they would be entitled to federal disaster assistance.</p>
<p>“So will our government now deprive a household with a citizen member of assistance because undocumented people live in the household, too?” asked a State VOAD chair who asked to speak on the condition of anonymity for fear of retribution. “Is the federal government saying that a disaster case manager can’t even advise someone where to get help if they are undocumented or their family is? Is that really what we’ve come to?”</p>
