---
author: cloudflare.com
cover_image: >-
  https://cf-assets.www.cloudflare.com/slt3lc6tev37/53qCYhQbir5WtIU0VDWESo/954a48bfb17f429acf469e5f14345d83/unnamed-3.png
date: '2025-10-03T14:40:31.456Z'
dateFolder: 2025/10/03
description: >-
  Cloudflare, Inc. (NYSE: NET), the leading connectivity cloud company, today
  announced plans to introduce NET Dollar, a new U.S. dollar-backed stablecoin
  that will enable instant, secure transactions for the agentic web. NET Dollar
  will help power a new business model for the Internet that rewards
  originality, sustains creativity, and enables innovation in an AI-driven
  world.  
isBasedOn: >-
  https://www.cloudflare.com/press/press-releases/2025/cloudflare-introduces-net-dollar-to-support-a-new-business-model-for-the-ai-driven-internet/
link: >-
  https://www.cloudflare.com/press/press-releases/2025/cloudflare-introduces-net-dollar-to-support-a-new-business-model-for-the-ai-driven-internet/
slug: >-
  2025-10-03-httpswwwcloudflarecompresspress-releases2025cloudflare-introduces-net-dollar-to-support-a-new-business-model-for-the-ai-driven-internet
tags:
  - ai
  - tech
title: >-
  Cloudflare Introduces NET Dollar to Support a New Business Model for the
  AI-Driven Internet
---
<h2><p>NET Dollar will help power global, secure transactions at the speed of the Internet</p> </h2>
<p>AI is fundamentally changing how humans interact with the web. Instead of driving every interaction themselves, humans are beginning to delegate tasks to autonomous AI agents to book a flight, order groceries, manage calendars and more. For this to happen, the underlying financial system will also need to evolve. The AI-driven Internet will need money that is instant, global, and secure so that AI agents, developers, and creators can transact instantly, automatically, and reliably.</p>
<p>“For decades, the business model of the Internet ran on ad platforms and bank transfers. The Internet’s next business model will be powered by pay-per-use, fractional payments, and microtransactions—tools that shift incentives toward original, creative content that actually adds value,” said Matthew Prince, co-founder and CEO of Cloudflare. “By using our global network, we are going to help modernize the financial rails needed to move money at the speed of the Internet, helping to create a more open and valuable Internet for everyone.”</p>
<p><strong>Building an Open, Sustainable Internet Economy with NET Dollar</strong></p>
<p>Cloudflare has been a global company from day one, helping customers around the world to accelerate performance, secure websites and networks, and develop and deploy applications. Now, Cloudflare aims to do this with transactions, offering an Internet-native payment system that is fast, secure, and globally accessible. Stablecoin is one of many tools that, alongside existing financial systems, can help the AI-driven Internet thrive, with speed, trust, and interoperability.</p>
<p>NET Dollar will help modernize the payment ecosystem for the future of the agentic web by:</p>
<ul> <li><strong>Making payments easy anywhere in the world:</strong> Agents will need systems to enable payments that are not only fast and secure, but also trusted, recorded transparently, and executed reliably at a global scale – across currencies, geographies, and time zones. </li> <li><strong>Enabling instant, automated transactions:</strong> Personal agents will be able to take instant, programmatic actions like paying for the cheapest flight, or ordering an item the moment it goes on sale. Business agents could be instructed to pay suppliers when a delivery is confirmed.</li> <li><strong>Unlocking a new business model for the Internet:</strong> NET Dollar will enable creators to be rewarded for unique and original content, developers to easily monetize APIs and applications, and AI companies to contribute back to the ecosystem that fuels them by compensating content sources fairly.</li> </ul>
<p>Cloudflare is also contributing to open standards such as the <a href="https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ai-machine-learning/announcing-agents-to-payments-ap2-protocol">Agent Payments Protocol</a> and <a href="https://www.cloudflare.com/press/press-releases/2025/cloudflare-and-coinbase-will-launch-x402-foundation/">x402</a>, to simplify the process of sending and receiving payments on the Internet.</p>
<p>Developers, creators, and AI innovators interested in shaping the Internet’s next chapter can visit <a href="https://netdollar.cloudflare.com">netdollar.cloudflare.com</a> to learn more.</p>
<p><strong>About Cloudflare</strong></p>
<p>Cloudflare, Inc. (NYSE: NET) is the leading connectivity cloud company on a mission to help build a better Internet. It empowers organizations to make their employees, applications and networks faster and more secure everywhere, while reducing complexity and cost. Cloudflare’s connectivity cloud delivers the most full-featured, unified platform of cloud-native products and developer tools, so any organization can gain the control they need to work, develop, and accelerate their business.</p>
<p>Powered by one of the world’s largest and most interconnected networks, Cloudflare blocks billions of threats online for its customers every day. It is trusted by millions of organizations – from the largest brands to entrepreneurs and small businesses to nonprofits, humanitarian groups, and governments across the globe.</p>
<p>Learn more about Cloudflare’s connectivity cloud at <a href="https://cloudflare.com/connectivity-cloud">cloudflare.com/connectivity-cloud</a>. Learn more about the latest Internet trends and insights at <a href="https://radar.cloudflare.com">https://radar.cloudflare.com</a>.</p>
<p><strong>Forward-Looking Statements</strong></p>
<p>This press release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which statements involve substantial risks and uncertainties. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements because they contain words such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “explore,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “could,” “intend,” “target,” “project,” “contemplate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” or “continue,” or the negative of these words, or other similar terms or expressions that concern Cloudflare’s expectations, strategy, plans, or intentions. However, not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words. Forward-looking statements expressed or implied in this press release include, but are not limited to, statements regarding the benefits and capabilities of NET Dollar and Cloudflare’s other products and technology, the benefits to Cloudflare’s customers from using NET Dollar and Cloudflare’s other products and technology, the timing of when NET Dollar or any of its related features will be generally available to all current and potential Cloudflare customers, the timing of when NET Dollar or any of its related features will be developed and available in beta form, or generally available, to all current and potential Cloudflare customers, Cloudflare’s technological development, future operations, growth, initiatives, or strategies, and comments made by Cloudflare’s CEO and others. Actual results could differ materially from those stated or implied in forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including but not limited to, risks detailed in Cloudflare’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including Cloudflare’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 31, 2025, as well as other filings that Cloudflare may make from time to time with the SEC.</p>
<p>The forward-looking statements made in this press release relate only to events as of the date on which the statements are made. Cloudflare undertakes no obligation to update any forward-looking statements made in this press release to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this press release or to reflect new information or the occurrence of unanticipated events, except as required by law. Cloudflare may not actually achieve the plans, intentions, or expectations disclosed in Cloudflare’s forward-looking statements, and you should not place undue reliance on Cloudflare’s forward-looking statements.</p>
<p>© 2025 Cloudflare, Inc. All rights reserved. Cloudflare, the Cloudflare logo, and other Cloudflare marks are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Cloudflare, Inc. in the U.S. and other jurisdictions. All other marks and names referenced herein may be trademarks of their respective owners.</p>
