---
author: Matthew Garrett's Blog
cover_image: null
date: '2026-04-01T12:14:51.149Z'
dateFolder: 2026/04/01
description: >-
  Because I am bad at giving up on things, I’ve been running my own email server
  for over 20 years. Some of that time it’s been a PC at the end of a DSL line,
  some of that time it’s been a Mac Mini in a data centre, and some of that time
  it’s been a hosted VM. Last year I decided to bring it in house, and since
  then I’ve been gradually consolidating as much of the rest of my online
  presence as possible on it.
isBasedOn: >-
  https://codon.org.uk/~mjg59/blog/p/self-hosting-as-much-of-my-online-presence-as-practical/
link: >-
  https://codon.org.uk/~mjg59/blog/p/self-hosting-as-much-of-my-online-presence-as-practical/
slug: >-
  2026-04-01-httpscodonorgukmjg59blogpself-hosting-as-much-of-my-online-presence-as-practical
tags:
  - tech
  - self-hosting
title: Self hosting as much of my online presence as practical
---
<p>Because I am bad at giving up on things, I’ve been running my own email server for over 20 years. Some of that time it’s been a PC at the end of a DSL line, some of that time it’s been a Mac Mini in a data centre, and some of that time it’s been a hosted VM. Last year I decided to bring it in house, and since then I’ve been gradually consolidating as much of the rest of my online presence as possible on it. I mentioned this <a href="https://nondeterministic.computer/@mjg59/116321518908968091">on Mastodon</a> and a couple of people asked for more details, so here we are.</p>
<p>First: <a href="https://www.monkeybrains.net/">my ISP</a> doesn’t guarantee a static IPv4 unless I’m on a business plan and that seems like it’d cost a bunch more, so I’m doing what I <a href="https://mjg59.dreamwidth.org/72095.html">described here</a>: running a Wireguard link between a box that sits in a cupboard in my living room and the smallest <a href="https://us.ovhcloud.com/">OVH</a> instance I can, with an additional IP address allocated to the VM and NATted over the VPN link. The practical outcome of this is that my home IP address is irrelevant and can change as much as it wants - my DNS points at the OVH IP, and traffic to that all ends up hitting my server.</p>
<p>The server itself is pretty uninteresting. It’s a refurbished HP EliteDesk which idles at 10W or so, along 2TB of NVMe and 32GB of RAM that I found under a pile of laptops in my office. We’re not talking rackmount Xeon levels of performance, but it’s entirely adequate for everything I’m doing here.</p>
<p>So. Let’s talk about the services I’m hosting.</p>
<h2>Web </h2>
<p>This one’s trivial. I’m not really hosting much of a website right now, but what there is is served via Apache with a Let’s Encrypt certificate. Nothing interesting at all here, other than the proxying that’s going to be relevant later.</p>
<p>Inbound email is easy enough. I’m running Postfix with a pretty stock configuration, and my MX records point at me. The same Let’s Encrypt certificate is there for TLS delivery. I’m using Dovecot as an IMAP server (again with the same cert). You can find plenty of guides on setting this up.</p>
<p>Outbound email? That’s harder. I’m on a residential IP address, so if I send email directly nobody’s going to deliver it. Going via my OVH address isn’t going to be a lot better. I have a Google Workspace, so in the end I just made use of <a href="https://knowledge.workspace.google.com/admin/gmail/advanced/route-outgoing-smtp-relay-messages-through-google">Google’s SMTP relay service</a>. There’s various commerical alternatives available, I just chose this one because it didn’t cost me anything more than I’m already paying.</p>
<h2>Blog </h2>
<p>My blog is largely static content generated by <a href="https://gohugo.io/">Hugo</a>. Comments are <a href="https://remark42.com/">Remark42</a> running in a Docker container. If you don’t want to handle even that level of dynamic content you can use a third party comment provider like <a href="https://disqus.com">Disqus</a>.</p>
<h2>Mastodon </h2>
<p>I’m deploying Mastodon pretty much along the lines of the <a href="https://github.com/mastodon/mastodon/blob/main/docker-compose.yml">upstream compose file</a>. Apache is proxying /api/v1/streaming to the websocket provided by the streaming container and / to the actual Mastodon service. The only thing I tripped over for a while was the need to set the “X-Forwarded-Proto” header since otherwise you get stuck in a redirect loop of Mastodon receiving a request over http (because TLS termination is being done by the Apache proxy) and redirecting to https, except that’s where we just came from.</p>
<p>Mastodon is easily the heaviest part of all of this, using around 5GB of RAM and 60GB of disk for an instance with 3 users. This is more a point of principle than an especially good idea.</p>
<h2>Bluesky </h2>
<p>I’m arguably cheating here. Bluesky’s federation model is quite different to Mastodon - while running a Mastodon service implies running the webview and other infrastructure associated with it, Bluesky has split that into <a href="https://docs.bsky.app/docs/advanced-guides/federation-architecture">multiple parts</a>. User data is stored on Personal Data Servers, then aggregated from those by Relays, and then displayed on Appviews. Third parties can run any of these, but a user’s actual posts are stored on a PDS. There are various reasons to run the others, for instance to implement alternative moderation policies, but if all you want is to ensure that you have control over your data, running a PDS is sufficient. I followed <a href="https://cprimozic.net/notes/posts/notes-on-self-hosting-bluesky-pds-alongside-other-services/">these instructions</a>, other than using Apache as the frontend proxy rather than nginx, and it’s all been working fine since then. In terms of ensuring that my data remains under my control, it’s sufficient.</p>
<h2>Backups </h2>
<p>I’m using <a href="https://torsion.org/borgmatic/">borgmatic</a>, backing up to a local Synology NAS and also to my parents’ home (where I have another HP EliteDesk set up with an equivalent OVH IPv4 fronting setup). At some point I’ll check that I’m actually able to restore them.</p>
<h2>Conclusion </h2>
<p>Most of what I post is now stored on a system that’s happily living under a TV, but is available to the rest of the world just as visibly as if I used a hosted provider. Is this necessary? No. Does it improve my life? In no practical way. Does it generate additional complexity? Absolutely. Should you do it? Oh good heavens no. But you can, and once it’s working it largely just keeps working, and there’s a certain sense of comfort in knowing that my online presence is carefully contained in a small box making a gentle whirring noise.</p>
