---
author: Benn Jordan
cover_image: 'https://i.ytimg.com/vi/gqtrNXdlraM/maxresdefault.jpg?v=67cdabdf'
date: '2025-08-03T19:53:20.212Z'
dateFolder: 2025/08/03
description: "Go to https://ground.news/benn to combat rampant misinformation online. See through bias and compare multiple perspectives. Sign up through my link to get 40% off unlimited access on the Vantage plan. Proceeds for this sponsorship will go to UNICEF Ukraine. \nNotes, suggested reading, and corrections below \U0001F447\U0001F3FB\n\n\U0001F497 Support this channel and join an amazing community: http://www.patreon.com/bennjordan\n\n\U0001F440 Stalk me on social media for more frequent updates: https://linktr.ee/BennJordan\n\n\U0001F534 Subscribe To My Streaming Channel. I stream weekly! https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=geaIEWGhgsI\n\n⚡Those lovely custom acoustic panels in the background: https://psyacoustics.com\n\nCorrections and notes: \nA few things were possibly over-simplified to prevent this from becoming a 170 part Ken Burns series. Please do some searching/reading and learn your butt off! I'll add to these as needed, as responding to comments will just get lost in the ether of YouTube comment pages. \n\n- Futures contracts and options are a bit different. In a contract, the buyer is obligated to buy the asst, and an option frees them of that obligation. \n\n- The wealth generated in the 1950's can also be greatly contributed to much of Europe's destruction and how America used that as leverage to lend money under the condition of the US dollar being standardized for trade. This is a fascinating hour long video in itself. \n\n- I anticipate that a portion of viewers will argue that this is just a new phase of capitalism. I disagree, but delving further into that disagreement requires further analyzing the semantic definition of \"capitalism\", which is probably a waste of time. So whether this is a new thing that doesn't have a name or a new mutation of capitalism that doesn't have a name, both are correct in describing the circumstances. \n\n- Bitcoin would've been a great answer to a lot of these problems. Unfortunately it's not used as a currency, but as a prospective asset. If it's not replacing the US dollar enmasse, it'..."
isBasedOn: >-
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?si=mMyjdRHpbFdJNbOx&v=gqtrNXdlraM&feature=youtu.be
link: >-
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?si=mMyjdRHpbFdJNbOx&v=gqtrNXdlraM&feature=youtu.be
slug: >-
  2025-08-03-httpswwwyoutubecomwatchsimmyjdrhpbfdjnboxandvgqtrnxdlramandfeatureyoutube
tags:
  - ai
  - economy
  - marketing
  - privacy labor
  - economic inequality
title: You Are Witnessing the Death of American Capitalism
---
<p>In early 2020, I started becomingincreasingly interested in finance. Iknow, but this was mostly trying to makesense of the logic behind what theFederal Reserve did in response to COVID,which I’ll get into later. But the moreand more I learned, the less and less itmade sense. So I started deeply analyzingstocks from companies that I waspersonally and professionally familiarwith, such as Curiosity Stream andSpotify, which led to me starting aprivate fund that strategically shortedthose companies. I even ended up gettinghired as a freelance consultant forventure capital firms—me, a musician withno higher education whatsoever. And themore time that I spent looking at andstudying the big picture, the more that Idoubted myself, as if the only twooptions were option A: me being unable to</p><p>understand what every 25-year-old daytrader understands, or option B: I’m right,and every hedge fund manager andbillionaire is wrong. But what if there’sa third option? What if capitalism’sdeath wasn’t a mistake or something thatthe ultra-wealthy were trying to avoid?What if the pesky burden of labor lawsand taxation could be avoided byDeprioritizing the goal of financialprofit, or maybe even money itself, thisvideo is going to explain or explorewhat I and an increasing number ofeconomists think is happening, or hasalready happened to capitalism. MoreImportantly, I'm going to try toencapsulate the unsettling socioeconomicreality that we're living in, as so muchhas happened in the last decade that itseems foggy to us.</p><p>[Music]You can't fairly describe capitalismwithout mentioning its predecessor,feudalism. Feudalism was a powerstructure in kingdoms where wealth wasdefined by the control of land ratherthan money, and our history books tell usthat feudalism ended sometime in thelate 15th century. But there's a muchmore recent version of it that would bea much better example for the purpose ofthis video. When the Civil War ended, orwhen the first American Civil War ended,depending on how far into the futureyou're watching this video, a lot offormer slaves were offered a deal wherethey could continue living and farmingon the same land where they were slaves,in exchange for a portion of the crops.</p><p>In many cases, they would only be able tosell their remaining crops through theplantation store, and with that income,they could participate in trade, whichwould allow them to buy more tools andnegotiating power, and hope to eventuallybuy land for themselves. By the late1930s, two-thirds of sharecroppers wereactually white, and the Great Depressionhad shut down enough farms that many ofthe tenants migrated to large cities tobecome factory workers. It would beimportant to note that sharecropping isnot technically outlawed today; it's justthat American capitalism's growth madeit obsolete. The former definition ofcapitalism is a system in which</p><p>individuals and private parties controlthe means of production, and profits arethe key driver of economic activity. It'simportant to note that within aclosed system with no new variables,capitalism success can almostexclusively be measured by the velocityof money. The classic example is thefarmer and the mechanic. This tinyeconomy has $50 total. The farmer trades$50 to the mechanic for tractor repair,and then the mechanic trades $40 forA barn cat for $10 from the farmer, and inthis cycle, $100 has changed hands. So, thevelocity of money is measured as two.</p><p>This is calculated as the velocitywithin a time period equals the totalsum of transactions over the total ofmoney in that economy. In a larger moderneconomy, the classic way to increase thevelocity of money is to reduce interestrates. But when spending becomes recklessand leads to higher prices and reducedcurrency value, the classic move is tomake borrowing more expensive.</p><p>Governments around the world eithercontrol or have a lot of influence ininterest rates, and some people thinkthat because of this, the Federal Reserveshould be abolished. Nobody couldpredict exactly what would happen if theFederal Reserve was abolished, but itwould almost certainly result in a lotof turbulence in the market that wouldleave a lot of victims in its wake.</p><p>Around the world, a really useful way tounderstand how wealth is distributed isto stop using money as a commodity anduse something that people actually useor consume. Let's say, a can of CokeZero from a 12-pack.</p><p>$100,000 and a traditional investment.</p><p>A fund like Vanguard would come out toabout 312,000 cans of Coke Zero in 2019.That same investment, untouched, is worthabout 330,000 cans of Coke Zero now, sothat's sweet—815,000 cans of Coke Zero forfree. Now, on the other hand, a personworking for minimum wage full-time inIowa would have made43,360 cans per year before taxes in 2019.Today, in 2025, they're making22,170 cans. Somehow this person got a49% wage cut, while the person with themarket fund got free soda. Amazingly,through the miracle of inflation, themoney decreases in value for everyone,while the actual wealth itself moves upto the top.</p><p>The concept of the stock market wasproposed in 1792, but it wasn’t until1830 when the first stock was sold onthe New York Stock Exchange. It wasinitially filled with railroads andbanks, but by the next decade, everybodywith a business idea wanted to havetheir name listed. This rapidly stimulatedboth technological and economic growth,and by the end of the century, the middleclass was getting more and more familiarwith investment. By the 1920s, you mightbe seen as a fool for not being involved.</p><p>In stock trading, in fact, you might beseen as a fool for not borrowing moneyto invest in stocks. Many middle-class investorswere borrowing with a 1:3 ratio, meaningthat they would borrow $300 for every$100 they invested. This soundsabsolutely insane, but it didn’t seem asrisky due to the introduction of futures.</p><p>In the mid-1800s, the Chicago Board ofTrade had a pretty great idea to makegrain trade a lot more reliable and alot less volatile. Rather than grainfarms having to guess what demand wouldbe at the end of the season, they couldsell it at a discount in advance. Afuture is not a stock or share, but acontract guaranteeing a futuretransaction.</p><p>It just so happens that Ihave a whole bunch of healthy femalechicks who will shower me with more eggsthan I know what to do with in about 3months, and I really could use a littlebit of extra money to build an additionto their coop so they could have roomto run around and be healthy egglayers when they become adults. So youbeing an opportunist and a capitalistcan buy my egg futures off of me andthen sell eggs to restaurants in thesummer at a profit and make money.</p><p>Without ever having to shovel theheaping amounts of chicken thatI'll have to shovel. All right, let's goback to the 1920s. By 1919, due to thepopularity of futures and people'swillingness to borrow money to buy them,a farmer could get $2.90 for a bushel ofwheat. This was inflationary to say theleast and even made the sharecroppingeconomy I mentioned earlier moredesirable for a brief period of time. Itstarted getting really out of hand. So,the Grain Futures Administration wasformed and implemented a large mandatorydaily ledger and reporting system fortraders. The U.S. Secretary of Agriculture</p><p>would repeatedly suspend the reportingsystem, creating more volatility and moreopportunists taking advantage of thatvolatility. Then, in October of 1929, asthere was more money out on the loanthan there was circulating in America atthe time, and as more wheat was beingproduced than the population could everhope to eat, the elephant in the roomwoke up and took a giant leap on thefloor. Everybody tried to get ahead ofthe crash, which more or less caused thecrash. By the end, a bushel of wheatwas only worth 49 cents.</p><p>For years, capitalism was a failed experiment.Well, actually, for the next 20 years,we like to think that capitalism madeits great comeback during the SecondWorld War. But by today’s standards, thatwas—I'm not even sure if I’m allowed tosay this word in public anymore withoutbeing arrested—communism. But we didn’tjust go from the freezer to the fryingpan immediately. Franklin D. Roosevelt’sNew Deal founded the SEC to protectinvestors. Moving forward, it alsointroduced the Social Security Act andthe Fair Labor Standards Act, andprohibited child labor while securing anational minimum wage and workers' rightsto unionize. Successful fellows with even</p><p>a fraction of the wealth that Elon Muskor Jeff Bezos has would have paid a 79%income tax, and companies like Tesla andAmazon would have paid a corporate taxrate of 15%. But the sword wouldn’t comeuntil the U.S. got involved with World WarII. To say that the war effort stimulatedthe American economy would be a vastunderstatement. However, this was under aclosely guiding hand from the federalgovernment, and it was every free marketcapitalist's worst nightmare. By today’sstandards, many companies were told whatThey would be producing and how much ofit they would be producing and how muchthey would be paying their labor force.</p><p>American citizens got ration books andstamps and were only allowed to buyspecific amounts of staple consumer items,like bread and sugar. And if you wantedto buy a car or gasoline, you had tojustify a need to the government. Mostconsumer items that came in metalcontainers, which was like everythingback then, could not be purchased againunless you recycled the container first.</p><p>This rationing more or less lasted until1947 and into the 1950s. Fellas like Elonand Bezos would have had their incometaxed as much as 92%. And again, yes, inmodern times, this sounds like acapitalist nightmare, but it resultedin a 37% growth over the next decade andmade America the richest country onEarth. It is now literally referred to asthe Golden Age of American capitalism.And despite a few brief bumps in theroad, things just kept growing andgrowing and growing exponentially, makingus richer and happier.In the early 2000s, capitalism got socomplicated that investors didn’t fullyunderstand what they were buying.</p><p>That's not an exaggeration. This was by design; there were trillions of dollarsto be made by OB fisca. What commoditieswere being sold in your average stockmarket transaction? A great exampleeverybody watching this has heard theterm subprime mortgage, but I’d guessthat not everybody knows exactly what itmeans. It means a risky mortgage. Ifyou've ever purchased a house, you mayhave witnessed the wild auction thattakes place without your consent orknowledge the moment you sign themortgage papers. The average mortgageis sold two to three times before it'spaid off. Here’s an example of a 2005</p><p>style mortgage. It's an expensive house;it had ninja verification, which means noincome, no job, or assets. The credit scoreis around 500, and it has an 8% or higherinterest rate. That’s an ARM loan, meaningthat it will be adjusted to the marketin the future. The delinquency rate of amortgage like this in 2008 was 25%. Soanyway, if you want to buy it, I'll justtake 2% of the overall value, andyou'll still make a bunch of money whenthe loan is paid off. Why don’t you wantto buy it? Hang on, I have an idea: let’smake this a little bit of a safer bet.</p><p>Let's mix it up with some othermortgages, and I'll get somebody whodepends on me for business to give it arating, and then we can just call it amortgage-backed security, which is a typeof bond. It's a bit like a future, butit's even better because you can exitthe investment whenever you want just byreselling it.[Music]Now, look at this: if that little riskymortgage forecloses, the loan will stillbe backed by all of the others, and I betyou can’t even make out which one wasthe original loan. This isn’t likesome risky stock; this is an investmenton housing and land, and you and I bothknow that God isn’t making any more land.</p><p>Right? It is the bedrock of Americancapitalism, and it's a safe place to putyour money. It’sgone; a lot of batshit insane thingshappened in the 2008 financial crisis. Ibet you could probably make some reallysuccessful Hollywood movies about it. I’mjack to thetest good; ultimately, in just 6 months,the Dow Jones lost 54% of its value.Massive banks perished: Washington Mutual,Bear Stearns, Fannie Mae, Lehman Brothers.</p><p>We needed another New Dealbefore people's bank accounts were wiped,and this time we tried something alittle bit different. These are notnormalcircumstances. The market is notfunctioning properly. Instead of doingsomething utterly reckless, likerevamping and updating laws to protectworkers or creating programs to help themiddle class, so we could be, you know, onpar with the rest of the developed world,we figured that if we just gave $700billion in bailouts to banks, that moneywould trickle down and more or less</p><p>accomplish the exact same thing. Now,you’re never going to believe this, butit did not ultimately. While unemploymentand foreclosure skyrocketed, the banksexperienced a generous heaping spoonfulof socialism, and to pay for this, weborrowed money and we printed money. In2006, the Federal Reserve printed $148billion in currency. By 2012, that numberhad increased to $380 billion. Theinflation was immediately reflected inhome prices and even more so in thegreat awkwardly socialist rebound of thestock market.</p><p>In 1994, Jeff Bezos was a hedgeA fund manager who wanted to start anonline bookstore, which was already ahard pitch at the time. Why would anybodywant to buy books online when they couldjust go to the library? But it was evenworse. He was allegedly transparent tohis investors and told them that heintended to prioritize growth overprofit for a very long time. All in all,he had 60 meetings, offering 1% ofownership for $50,000, and the biggestinvestors were his parents, buying up 6%with 22 investors. Amazon.com got off theground with a million dollars. By 1999,Amazon was selling everything from booksto DVDs to household goods toelectronics. Soon after, the companytransitioned from being a retailer to anonline gateway for other retailers.</p><p>Amazon customers could pay a low annualmembership fee for unlimited free 2-dayshipping, and both retailers andmanufacturers began to become dependenton that convenience. Retailers weren’tthe only ones with the dependency.Here are three stats that willprobably upend your whole day. By 2021,it was estimated that 60% of the USpopulation were part of an Amazon Primemembership.</p><p>One percent of Amazon Prime members compareprices with other online retailers, andincredibly, while Amazon refuses toconfirm this, there are thousands ofreports of people finding examples whereprices for the exact same products arehigher for Amazon Prime subscribers. Doesthat sound like free market capitalismto you? Walmart had to resort toemulating Amazon's business model in anattempt to keep up. A decade ago, Amazonhad surpassed Walmart's market capdespite Walmart having over10,000 massive, theme park-sized storesworldwide. Walmart is far from the onlycompany trying to mimic Amazon's growthand chokepoint strategy, and that's avast understatement. Fast scaling andblitz scaling have become a normal gameplan for startups. The definitions vary alittle bit, but fast scaling generallymeans to prioritize growth initiallywith an open-ended plan to make a profitlater. So, for example, if I wanted to fastscale a lemonade stand, I would make apitch deck for venture capital investorsthat proposed selling lemonade at 50% of</p><p>what it costs for me to make it. Thiswould grow my customer basesignificantly and starve out theNeighborhood children who I'd becompeting with. Then once I disrupted the lemonade market successfully,I'd work out a volume deal with lemonplantations and lower my costs whileslowly raising prices for the customersso a profit could be realized. Butscaling, on the other hand, is a lot morereckless and assertive. My VC proposalwould be to sell lemonade at half thecost but buy out all of the neighborhoodchildren for their stands. Then I'dbuy some lemon plantations and I'd pay$100 million to have the local footballstadium renamed "Ben's Lemonade Stadium."Every person in attendance would begiven free lemonade if they downloadedmy app. You may be asking how on Earththat would ever make a profit, but we'regoing to figure that part out when we'vedominated 80 to 90% of the lemonademarket and have millions of lemonadedrinkers. Right now we just need toconcentrate on disrupting that.</p><p>That probably still sounds like a terrible investment,but if you buy into the initial seedround of the investment, you'll have theopportunity to sell that equity at apremium in a Series A or Series B oreven better during an IPO launch.</p><p>The company enters a stock market valuedat, I don’t know, $15 billion to investors.In this stage, it's much less aboutprofit and more about a lucrative andrisky game of hot potato. An excellentexample that we’re all familiar with isUber. Here’s the original pitch deckproposing the disruption of the taxi cabindustry. It’s nearly delusional, claimingthat a city’s medallion system for cabsis a monopoly and that licensed cabdrivers paying for the medallions haveno accountability. In the future, digitaltaxi cab hailing can make, I guess,lifting up your hand unnecessary. Andwhen they say luxury, they meanprestigious vehicles like used Priuses.</p><p>These Priuses, driven bynon-employees who sign up, can be used todrop your kids off at school ortransport the elderly. Uber has had over25 rounds of funding that it has used toraw-dog its way into the cab economy andpay for everything from lobbying localgovernments to settling hundreds oflawsuits. Naturally, once the traditionalcab industry was more or less destroyed,the prices got jacked way up, and between2018 and 2021, the average price for anUber ride rose 92%.</p><p>Investors who unloaded equity when thecompany went public will obviously neverhave to work again. Public investors didnot fare so well, and the great Uber IPOlaunch and crash showed that some of usthought that maybe finally people arelearning not to be bullish aboutcompanies that have an annual operatingincome of negative billions of dollars.And despite this, by 2019, the AmericanStock Market gained an impressive 30%.We’re back,baby! Well, Co is a hot topic for debatethese days between scientists and cultmembers. Let’s try and remember howutterly terrifying 2020 actually was forus. The economy obviously screeched to ahalt, and many industries have still andprobably never will fully recover. Associety was forced to change itseconomic habits, and while the stockmarket initially crashed in 2020, withinone year it had risen to over 30% of itspre-pandemic levels. Despite the economicapocalypse happening around the world,this is because on March 23rd, 2020, theFederal Reserve announced that it wouldbe launching a bunch of new programs,like the primary corporate creditfacility, which would buy new corporateBonds and other programs that would buy</p><p>existing corporate bonds, mortgage-backedsecurities, and asset-backed securitiesfilled with student, car, credit card, andbusiness loan debt. The federal fundseffective interest rate dropped to0.05%, and all of this was before anyperson or local government received somuch as a dime in relief. The followingmonth, the CARES Act was announced, whichwas a free $1,200 check sent out toevery American making under $75,000 ayear, regardless of their circumstances,with no questions asked on how or whereit would be spent. This would be thefirst of three such checks that Americancitizens received, with a federal tabtotaling $814 billion. For those ofmy viewers who have been longing for anexplanation for the massive increase inhammock sales that year, now you haveyour answer. These stimulus checks werejust a tiny sliver of the overall $5trillion that the American governmentspent on subsidizing the economy. Youwould be right in assuming that the listof recipients was outrageous. Airlinesreceived more money than SNAP or foodassistance programs, and payroll taxexemptions got more than housing.</p><p>Programs and farmers combined massiveloans and grants were given to the likesof Kanye, P. Diddy, Jared Kushner, theChurch of Scientology. But moreimportantly, for the purposes of thisvideo, a huge portion of that money wentto fintech lenders, investment firms, andventure capital groups like AndreessenHorowitz, which was immediatelyrepurposed into investments in a newrapidly growing type of economy thatsome economists refer to.</p><p>[Music]As to help properly explain post-capitalism, I need to remind you of theutter absurdity of just having a billiondollars. Not only is it impossible tospend on even the most lavish thingsthat you would desire, but it's also verymuch not like having a garage full ofcash. For example, if Elon Musk, with hisvalue of $450 billion at the time of merecording this, negotiated a dealto buy South Africa, with its total grossdomestic product valued at $381 billion,he wouldn't be able to afford it due to</p><p>the value of his holdings droppingsignificantly as he liquidated theequity. If 13% of Tesla's sharesWould create an enormous surplus, and thecompany's value would crash. All networth does is obscure things. Cash is onlypowerful when you're broke, and it's onlyvaluable when you need or want somethingthat you otherwise couldn't get withoutcash. What I instead want my viewers tobe concerned with is your personallevels of power or control over thethings that you earn, consume, and trade.</p><p>In 1996, the US stock market had around8,000 companies listed, and since then,our economy has grown by over $25trillion. Now, our stock market boastsnearly 4,000 companies. In that sameperiod of time, the number of listedcompanies around the world went fromaround 24,000 to 51,000. So what ishappening here? Why would our variety ofpublic securities drop by 50% whilethe rest of the world'sdoubled?</p><p>[Music]Private equity— the term privateequity means more or less what you wouldexpect it to mean. These days, it'susually a larger company or firm thatbuys smaller companies and eithertransforms them from public companiesto private companies or justKeeps them as private companies, asopposed to a publicly traded company,that has a lot more obligations with theSecurities and Exchange Commission. Inthe 1990s, it was estimated that about 2%of the businesses in the US were ownedby private equity, and that number hassince grown to over 25%. Thisincludes everything from chemicalcompanies to farms, to vets, to grocerystore chains, to food delivery apps, to</p><p>gyms, to medical facilities, to drugcompanies. Many of these relatedbusinesses are owned by the sameinvestor M firms or their partners, whichsets the stage for an entire gallery ofanti-competitive business practices andtax shielding, using tactics likedividend recapitalization. In fact, thisis almost unnecessary these days, as anewer trend is private equity firmsliterally giving one of their portfoliocompanies a value and then selling it tothemselves. But the classic privateequity business model is borrowing andraising as much capital as possible tobuy and sell companies at a profit, andthe faster this process is done, thebetter, as this is the velocity of money.</p><p>This video you can argue that these arejust complex capitalist maneuvers orperhaps late-stage capitalism, a termthat’s been used since Werner Sombartcoined it in 1928. But even that is nothappening anymore. The velocity of thesetransactions is slowing downsignificantly, and the average privateequity holding time is the longest thatit’s been in 20 years. The co-stimulusand the market effect from it led to anenormous boost of acquisitions in 2020.</p><p>And even though we’re now past themedian average private equity holdingperiod of 3 to 5 years, exits have beenstagnant. What’s more alarming is that in2020, many workers proved to corporationsthat they don’t need to come into theoffice at all, which also proves tocorporations that many of them can bereplaced by labor from anyone in thedeveloping world who speaks English. Thatis a private equity investor’s wetdream. So what gives? Does nobody likemoney anymore? The point of all thismaneuvering is decreasingly aboutturning a profit and increasingly abouttransitioning to a rent-based economythat hedges against inflation.</p><p>Right after the 2008 financial crisis, investment firmsStarted betting big on farmland,typically hiring local farmers to managethem, but more frequently offering leaseback programs where the farmercontinues working but rents the land,ultimately losing control over theirworking budget and circumstances.</p><p>Otherwise, since then, and especiallysince 2020, in almost all cases,investment is not attracted toinnovation or profitability, but tobusiness models that act as a middleman,offering subscriptions to products orservices you would otherwise buydirectly. For example, software, movies,video games, parcel delivery,headphones, cell phones, groceries,clothing, underwear, heated car seats,and pregnancy. A rent-based economy hasalways been present in real estate, butif you're an American homeowner, then</p><p>you've probably had an annoying amountof investment groups asking if you'dlike to sell your house. It's notunusual for those investment groups topay over market value for single-familyhomes. It also shouldn't surprise you tohear that homeownership has beendeclining, particularly for millennials,with nearly two out of three peopleUnder the age of 40, many renters argue that this is primarily due toinflation and sluggish wage increases,but the cost-to-income ratio has risenfor renters and dropped for homeowners.</p><p>The wealth gap between renters andhomeowners has widened by over 50% inthe last decade. In lower and middleclass households, white people are nearlytwo times more likely to be homeownersthan people of color, meaning thatyounger minority groups are likely to beincreasingly disproportionately punishedin the future. When you take thisdata into consideration, profit and evenmoney itself is only really valuablewhen it buys power. And if a societalsystem can be engineered to gain powerwithout profit or money, capitalismbegins to exist as something to exploitwithin that system, under its umbrella.</p><p>The sounds hyperbolic, but it needs to besaid a lot more often. Most of us do notrealize that we are in a constant battlewith billionaires who don't want us toown things, but rent them. And when wedon't own things, we lose control overour own budgets, lives, decisions, andultimately our own destinies. Here's apertinent example: Did somebody that youDid someone send you a link to this video, ordid you type in "Ben Jordan new video" andfind it that way? Or was it recommendedto you by an algorithm? Or was it placedon your sidebar? Or did it autoplay whenanother video ended? This next and finalchapter is very much about the type oftransaction that you and I are havingright now: me working without benefits,</p><p>guaranteed pay, or protections to makesomething to use as bait to get you toeither watch targeted advertisements orpay $14 a month without even beingoffered a chance to indefinitely playthe video file offline on your owndevice. And while you do that, your everymove is being harvested for data toempower the company. Let's take a look atthis definition again, and let me knowhow well it describes our littletransaction here. Capitalism is formallydescribed as an economic system in whichindividuals and private parties controlthe means of production, and profits arethe key driver of economic activity.</p><p>Long before the pandemic, the foundationhad already been laid for an economythat transcended goods and services.Facebook's Cambridge Analytica scandalwhere 87 million users werePsychologically profiled without consentand served political ads was hugelyassociated with both the 2016presidential election and the Brexitreferendum. Many people believe, includingwhistleblowers who worked in the datacenters, that without Cambridge Analytica,the UK would still be part of theEuropean Union. Better yet, here's aleaked debriefing slideshow fromCambridge Analytica giving themselvescredit for using personal data incombination with misinformationcampaigns to win an election. AsAmericans were concerned and distractedby claims of voter fraud and hackedmachines, we forgot to notice thatDemocratic elections don’t work whennews and information are no longerdemocratized. For example, in mostdictatorships, the government will havean office that permits or denies whichstories can run in the newspaper. In 2025,every piece of news that the averagevoter sees is manipulated by a thirdparty aggregator. Even if you go tosomething like Google News and selectthe generalized headline areas, your feedwill be different than mine. Thisdisequilibrating of information wasConcerning enough, when it was being donefor ad revenue and profit, but now it'sabout a lot more than that. Whethercapitalism is healthy or unhealthy atany given point in time, it hasalways provided the framework fornegotiation between profit and labor. InKarl Marx's critique of political</p><p>economy, labor is broken into twosubcategories: there's abstract labor,which is what I'm doing right now whenmaking this video. I'm learning, I'mgaining experience, I'm sharinginformation, and overall I'm just feedingmy passion. The other is concretelabor, which is what somebody would bedoing if they were holding a boom micover me or making me coffee. Capitalismobviously requires concrete labor, but itthrives on abstract labor as itprovides organic growth. The problemis that you can't just snap yourfingers and get abstract labor; you can'teven buy it because someone's passionand happiness is more valuable to themthan a commodity. So corporationsclassically try to generate it throughmorale-boosting corporate programs,retreats, and parties. This has been amajor challenge since the IndustrialRevolution, even when you’re paying acompetitive salary, health insurance, 401k,and bonuses. But when you hire gigworkers that have no benefits, laborprotections, or even guaranteed income,which, by the way, is often below minimumwage, how can you expect to extractabstract labor? An abstract labor invalue is extremely high in CreativeIndustries. How can you expect musiciansto, on average, spend more in fees to giveyou their music than you’ll ever paythem in royalties? How can you expect anapp or game developer to give you 30% oftheir income when you’re not evenoffering support or advertisement? Orhow can you expect somebody to buythousands of dollars of camera equipmentto start a competitive YouTube channel?</p><p>Okay, the other side of the coin: why would Ias a YouTuber take a modest salary toproduce, shoot, and edit short stories forI don’t know, the New York Times when Ican have full control over my content,where I’ll be rewarded appropriately forall of my hard work? Or why wouldsomebody work for a chauffeur companywhen they could set their own hours,depending on how much money they neededin any given week?</p><p>The 2024 Culture and Trends report states that 65% ofGen Z identifies themselves as contentcreators, and YouTube doesn't exactly hidewhy this is such good news foradvertisers who intend on capitalizingon this societal snowball effect. But wecan assume that if and when thatgeneration enters the labor force, theywon't exactly be bringing high levels ofabstract value to the car insuranceclaims adjuster cubicle. But this isnothing new. Long before the pandemic, thelabor force participation rate haddropped significantly from its peak in2000, and you can see the decline growingexponentially as big tech entered the</p><p>economy. It obviously crashed during thepandemic, and now even though labor forceparticipation was at a 35-year low in2019, we still haven't even recovered tothat level. Meanwhile, in 2024, 36% of usworkers are participants in the gigeconomy. It is projected that by 2027,that number will have grown to over halfof the entire American workforce. Hmm, Iwonder what could possibly makeeverything that I told you in thischapter a hundred timesworse? In the late 1990s, we quicklyrealized how powerful marketing could be.</p><p>With the innocently named cookies, whichsimply track a user's activity with theprimary goal of optimizing targetedadvertising, when Facebook introduced thelike button in 2009, the power ofsentiment analysis was realized, and itwould only be a few years before youtelling your aunt that you bought a newgrill would lead to you seeing ads toget you to subscribe to subscription Services.Hey, look, there's acoupon for the annual plan.</p><p>Congratulations! For the next year ofyour life, the meat you grill will bechosen for you. It won't be graded likethe meat you get from the butcher; itwon't be FDA approved, and you'll paymore while a farmer on the other side ofthe world earns less.But it wouldn't be until the recent AI boom when sentimentanalysis would become sci-fi levels ofterrifying. Facebook has lost popularitywhile young users migrated to Instagramand TikTok. Now, to participate in yoursocial group, you are required to createcontent, and when you do that, AI analyzesthe sentiment of the content. If it'snot saying or showing anything thatisn't of interest to the platform, forexample, talking about a government coup,On TikTok, it is viewed by userswho have shown interest in that topic.</p><p>The content would then be graded by theamount of time that users would spendlooking at it before moving on to thenext photo or video, and the higher itscores, the more people it's shown to.Once it's graded as a useful video, it isshown to people who are most likely tofeel rewarded by watching it, analgorithm priority and optimizedplacement in the cycle can be purchased.</p><p>At a premium, in which case TikTok alsotakes between 10 and 15% commission of asale. So if I wanted to make some edgycatchy t-shirt that said, "I don’t know,rip capitalism," for example, and sell itin this vacuum of an economy that TikTok has, I’d go through a dropshippingservice like Printify, who would then actas a middleman for finding a printer.</p><p>Printify, of course, offers a subscriptiontoo, and they make money from both theprinters and the designers in this cycle.Abstract labor is either unpaid or paidpennies on the dollar in comparison tothe wealth that their labor generates.This isn’t exactly a speculation or aprophecy either. As of 2025, one out ofthree young people have shopped onSocial media in the last week andanother study of 14,000 global consumershas shown that 91% of people preferbuying cosmetics on social media. 81% ofthe people in that study prefer buyingclothing that way, while only 57% evenbother trying clothing on beforepurchasing them. Again, one couldargue that this is merely capitalism onmethamphetamines, but a store like Kohl'semploys 96,000 people; Printify employs</p><p>760 people. Sales have declined for11 consecutive quarters, and it can beexpected that their payroll will shrinkalong with it. The reason I'm usingclothing as an example here is to showyou how powerful sentiment analysis isat converting consumers to this neweconomy. Fifteen years ago, if you proposed theidea that the value of a video app wouldbe higher than, I don’t know, seeing howyour clothing looks or fits on youbefore buying it, you’d be laughed at. Themajority of the income from these everydaytransactions adds up and now goes tofirms that were subsidized with venturecapital. I can only imagine thatbeing an actual manufacturer is less andless desirable, which may additionallyexplain why labor participation is at.</p><p>Historic lows in the last two years as AIwas being pushed in my face virtuallyeverywhere, as I'm sure you haveexperienced as well. My Google searchesnow open a sidebar telling me about myprevious search that I don't havethe patience to sort out. Or if I want tomake sure that a replacement vacuum hoseworks with my model of shop vac onAmazon instead of searching throughreviews and answers, I now have to talkto a bot named Rufus about it. This ishappening with emails, messagingapps, image editors—everything. I wasinitially really, really confused by thisbecause virtually nobody likes it. Itchanges familiar workflows of users,which risks somebody leaving yourecosystem, and it's really expensive. Justone round of training an LLM, or largelanguage model, can cost over $200million, and that's not to mention thehugely increased processing power thatneeds to be done every time that youquery that model. All of this is justhappening automatically, just to beg usto use it. Why? The reason that so manycloud-based companies are dumping somuch money and resources into pushingthis technology on everyone is toCapture the part of our routine that</p><p>comparison shops, researches, or asksfor advice or arrives at a logicalconclusion about something. If you becomefriends with ChatGPT, Gemini, or Rufusor Siri, and you consult with their vastinformational resources on a morepersonal and casual level, you're notonly supplying them with the purest formof sentiment analysis, but you're helpingthem build a system that will furthercontrol not only your decisions on whatto buy or subscribe to, but what hobbyyou'll take up next summer. Not only isit influencing your decision on where tobuy an engagement ring or where and whento go on vacation to propose to yourpartner, there's nothing stopping it frominfluencing your decision on whether youshould get married at all. It would bevery naive to think of digitalassistance as your assistance. They arevery much not there to help you, but tohelp their owners. The conclusionthat most of us have is that they'rethere to help their owners make moremoney. But in the case of things like theCambridge Analytica scandal or Twitter,they are quite literally and intentionallybecoming an interactive right-wing.</p><p>Propaganda tool. There’s a lot more to beworried about thanmoney. What we ultimately have is moneybeing extracted to systems that do notgrow or scale the way a capitalistsystem does, by expanding the assemblyline or opening more chain restaurants,or researching and patenting a new typeof refrigerant. I am personallyconvinced that the market will crashagain, and more money will be borrowedand printed that will ultimately beinvested into the further transformationinto a rent-based economy.</p><p>During World War I, America's debt to GDP ratio was35%. In World War II, as we strained everysingle resource that we had, itskyrocketed to 121%, meaning that we had21% more debt than value. As a nation, ourdebt to GDP ratio once again skyrocketedafter the 2008 crisis, and it just keptrising. Right now, we are at123%, higher than it has ever been in thehistory of our economy. Our national debtas of February 2025 is $36.5 trillion,and our total debt is $102 trillion. Iwould say that we're well past the pointof no return, but I don't even know whatthat is because this is so unprecedented.</p><p>And I assume that it would be easier toChange the value and concept of moneythan it would be to repay that level ofdebt. It’s worth pointing out thatthe primary owner of that debt isn’tChina or Japan or even our own FederalReserve; it’s us, investors. As this cyclecontinues to snowball, money will be lessand less valuable, not only because ofinflation, but in principle, when thegovernment is so closely entangled withthe people who have benefited the mostfrom this mass extraction of wealth froma capitalist economy, it stops making</p><p>sense to think of wealth as money. Hearme out: here’s a helpful metaphor fromthe book, "Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar."There’s a story where Stalin and hispowerful entourage of officials weretraveling by motorcade when they cameacross a peasant woman struggling topush her cart up a hill. Stalin saw thisand ordered the cars to stop. Heinquired about her situation; he wantedto give her some money to help her, butnot one person in his entire entouragehad a single ruble of cash on them.</p><p>That’s because their wealth was inideological power and influence. Theydidn’t need cash because no matter howDesired would be given to them. It wasn’tuntil the deep organized experiment ofCommunism fell that the Soviet rulingclass had to convert their wealth to atradable commodity. Unfortunately for oligarchs, money can’tbuy everything; money alone can’t changelaws. It can’t force people to dress theway you want them to dress or toidentify in a way that aligns with howyou see them. It can’t make ideologiesagainst the law. It can’t allow you tochange the race, culture, or ethnicity ofyour neighbors. You can’t buy someoneelse’s choice to be or not be a parent,to graduate or transcend from thoseunfathomable limits of what money’swealth can get you. You need to controlthe power of information so that you canmanipulate the world that you live in.</p><p>And I believe that that is exactlywhat’s happening, and unfortunately, Ithink it’s going to get a lot worsebefore it gets better. If you’ve stuckwith me this long to listen to andconsider my entire manifesto here, thankyou, and all I ask is that you considerthe information in this video when youmake personal decisions, read the news, orspend your precious time on this planet.</p><p>Participating in the post-capitalisteconomy, I suppose you want some adviceon how to educate yourself about currentevents when an excessive amount of newsorganizations are owned by billionairesand sometimes even governments. Well,Ground News. Come here, I'll show you; it'san app and website that collects newsarticles from around the world andorganizes them by political bias,reliability, and potential conflicts ofinterest such as media ownership. GroundNews is independently owned andfunded by subscribers like myself, andthey're vetted by three differentindependent news monitoring</p><p>organizations. So, here's an example, onethat'll probably be a sequel to thisvideo: Trump announces a strategic cryptoreserve including Bitcoin, Solana, XRP, andmore. That's from CNBC; it's owned by theRoberts family, very high factuality,center bias. Let's head over to the right,shall we? Trump moves the crypto strategicreserve forward, promises to elevatethe industry. Fox Business, owned by a mediaconglomerate, the Murdo family, has highfactuality, and it leans right. All right,going left: Trump's crypto reserve is apayoff for loyalists, published by Fast.</p><p>The company is individually owned, high in factuality, and leans left, but myfavorite is the Blind Spot Feed, whichshows you news that both the left and right arecompletely unaware of. For example,left-leaning news organizations don’tseem too interested in telling you thatthe EU spends more money on Russianenergy than on Ukraine aid, andunsurprisingly, right-leaning newsorganizations don’t really want to tellyou about an analysis that shows thatTrump tariffs will cost the average U.S.</p><p>family $1,600 or more per year. Anyway, ifthis is something you’re interested in,you could go to the link below or go toground.newb. If it jives with you,that link also gets you 40% off theUnlimited Vantage plan, which willprobably be the cheapest subscriptionthat you use. And once again, just likelast time, proceeds from the sponsorshipwill go to UNICEF Ukraine, which deliversessential supplies and education to themost vulnerable children in war regions.Just because our leaders have given upon them does not mean that we have to.This video took a lot of research andfact-checking, and it was an immenseand intimidating long-term project for me.</p><p>That very few of my viewers expected,much less asked for, despite all thefact-checking that I did. A lot of thisvideo is kind of philosophical, and I'mopen to being wrong. I do think that whatI said in this video is worthconsideration, as there are some veryreal statistics and scenarios that willaffect your life in some way, shapeor form. Most of all, I want to thank youfor your valuable time, and I also wantto thank my supporters. Videos like thisare part of my nonprofit and are almostalways funded by viewers like yourselfthrough Patreon. If you'd like tosupport future videos and be part of anamazing, healthy, and inspiring community,then we'd love to have you. Ironically,it's another damn subscription service,but it's a worthy one, and you can joinfor as little as $1. Thank you forwatching. Keep creating! Bye.</p>
