---
author: anastasiasalter.net
cover_image: null
date: '2026-01-08T13:43:41.551Z'
dateFolder: 2026/01/08
description: >-
  Critical making is a practice of making as scholarship, grounded in the
  humanities, that interweaves design, function, and theory towards born-digital
  scholarly practice.
isBasedOn: 'https://anastasiasalter.net/CriticalMaking2026/'
link: 'https://anastasiasalter.net/CriticalMaking2026/'
slug: 2026-01-08-httpsanastasiasalternetcriticalmaking2026
tags:
  - academia
title: 'ENG 6819: Critical Making for Humanist Scholarship'
---
<ul> <li><strong>Instructor:</strong> Dr. Anastasia Salter</li> <li><strong>Email:</strong> anastasia@ucf.edu</li> <li><strong>Course Meeting:</strong> Asynchronous Online</li> </ul>
<h2>Contents</h2>
<ul> <li><a href="https://anastasiasalter.net/CriticalMaking2026/#eng-6819-critical-making-for-humanist-scholarship">ENG 6819: Critical Making for Humanist Scholarship</a> <ul> <li><a href="https://anastasiasalter.net/CriticalMaking2026/#weekly-schedule">Weekly Schedule</a> <ul> <li><a href="https://anastasiasalter.net/CriticalMaking2026/#week-two-selfie-monday-january-19">Week Two: Selfie (Monday, January 19)</a></li> <li><a href="https://anastasiasalter.net/CriticalMaking2026/#week-three-comic-monday-january-26">Week Three: Comic (Monday, January 26)</a></li> </ul> </li> </ul> </li> </ul>
<h2>Course Description</h2>
<p>Critical making is a practice of making as scholarship, grounded in the humanities, that interweaves design, function, and theory towards born-digital scholarly practice. Engaging in scholarly communication through digital platforms demands attention to code, software, and hardware. This course emphasizes building a theoretical framework and applied practice in critical making, drawing on digital humanities discourse, intentional design, minimal scripting tools, and multimodal development as part of scholarly communication.</p>
<p>The opportunities critical making presents for humanist work are well-documented. Jentery Sayers’ <em>Making Things and Drawing Boundaries</em> (which we’ll be drawing upon during the course) collects cutting-edge humanist work from across the field, and in doing so points to the important interventions that critical making in the digital humanities can offer in how and what we know about technology as “not made from scratch but in media res; not transparent platforms but patchworks of memory and practice.” However, Sayers’ collection is also a reminder of how difficult it is to get started, with participation demanding layered expertise that is constantly changing. The combination of computational and systems thinking required for critical making develops what Michael Mateas describes as procedural literacy: “the ability to read and write processes, to engage procedural representation and aesthetics, to understand the interplay between the culturally‐embedded practices of human meaning‐making and technically‐mediated processes” (Mateas). These skills are of growing interest in transdisciplinary humanities, but still often seen as the domain of STEM programs, and the rhetoric of code and code education remains exclusionary. We will interrogate those assumptions and systems, emphasizing process over product, and building procedural literacy through play and exploration. As we explore computational creativity, we will also engage with the questions emerging from the increased availability and power of generative AI tools.</p>
<p>Each week, plan on following the module for all asynchronous activities. Each module will be divided into three sections:</p>
<ul> <li><strong>Weekly Readings.</strong> Complete this combination of primary and secondary texts prior to starting the making exercise. The full schedule of required readings is listed in the syllabus, but additional recommended readings will also be provided in each module.</li> <li><strong>Making Exercises.</strong> Each week’s making exercise will involve experimenting with a different tool for making: guidance will be provided on configuring and getting started with the tool, and students are encouraged to be inventive and playful.</li> <li><strong>Reflective Discussion.</strong> A weekly online discussion will provide the opportunity to share the process of making: the emphasis is not on “success” or “failure,” but on growth, exploration, and experimentation.</li> </ul>
<h2>Course Objectives</h2>
<ul> <li>Explore principles of inclusive design, emphasizing accessible, intersectional, approaches to user-centered making</li> <li>Become familiar with open source tools for critical making across born-digital projects, including games, installations, web-driven, critical code studies, and media archaeology approaches</li> <li>Develop skills in interface design, working through paper and digital prototyping, and emphasizing both aesthetics and usability</li> <li>Identify venues for born-digital scholarship and develop proposals for publication and funding</li> <li>Analyze and critique existing born-digital scholarship, learning from methods of scholarly communication in multimodal formats</li> <li>Extend existing skills in scripting and web development</li> </ul>
<h2>Materials and Texts</h2>
<p>This course requires a mix of applied and theoretical readings. All materials are available open access or for free through your UCF library access. The primary texts include:</p>
<ul> <li>Sasha Costanza-Chock, <em>Design Justice.</em> <a href="https://design-justice.pubpub.org/">Open Access</a></li> <li>Emily Johnson and Anastasia Salter, <em>Critical Making in the Age of AI.</em> <a href="https://www.fulcrum.org/concern/monographs/zc77ss95p">Open Access</a></li> <li>Thomas S. Mullaney, Benjamin Peters, Mar Hicks and Kavita Philip. <em>Your Computer is On Fire.</em> <a href="https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucf/detail.action?docID=6479710">Unlimited use ebook available through UCF</a></li> </ul>
<p>In addition, each module includes samples, tutorials, and resources to guide the week’s making experiments.</p>
<h2>Evaluation and Grading</h2>
<table> <tr> <th>Points</th> <th>Assignment Summary</th> <th>Due Date</th> </tr> <tbody> <tr> <td>6</td> <td><strong>Activity Verification</strong> - Complete the brief survey posted on Webcourses as soon as possible to confirm your enrollment in the course. As this is required by the university, please attend to it as soon as possible at the start of classes.</td> <td>Friday, January 16</td> </tr> <tr> <td>84</td> <td><strong>Making Exercises</strong> - Weekly discussions will consist of making, sharing, and reflecting on the process of exploring (12 weeks, 7 points each). Students will work from tutorials and try a new form every week, with reflective questions connecting the process of making to the theoretical frameworks and provocations offered by course readings.</td> <td>Weekly</td> </tr> <tr> <td>10</td> <td><strong>Reflection</strong> - During the final exam week, students will complete a written reflective essay on their journey, with particular consideration to next steps and potential future applications of the making mechanisms introduced throughout the semester.</td> <td>Sunday, May 3</td> </tr> </tbody> </table>
<p>Students can access their grades and feedback at any time using the Grade Book function of Webcourses. All assignments will be submitted through Webcourses. Plan on checking the site at least twice a week for updates and assignment information. Grades are calculated out of 100 following a standard letter scale.</p>
<p>Late work is accepted without penalty for one week after the listed deadline. If circumstances require extension beyond that deadline, please reach out to the instructor immediately. Additionally, here is one extra credit making exercise option available at the end of the semester for those who miss a weeek. Grades will be available through Webcourses and updated weekly.</p>
<h2>Asynchronous Online Course Structure</h2>
<p>This course uses a fully asynchronous online format, and relies upon students to complete all readings, engage with both course lectures and other online videos, and join in on course discussions. All assignments are due at the close of their listed module, but will be accepted with no penalty through the next listed deadline. Once an assignment closes, late work will not be accepted unless an additional extension has already been approved by the instructor: please reach out early if circumstances will require additional time!</p>
<ul> <li>The course has no synchronous meeting requirements: however, students are encouraged to attend optional events both on-campus and online if possible to build community and skills. Event information will be shared through weekly announcements.</li> <li>Office hour assistance is additionally available both through text on Webcourses messages and via Zoom: Zoom is recommended for advanced technical problems, where screen-sharing might be helpful to resolving errors.</li> <li>Students will need access to a reliable internet connection and computer to participate in this course. Due to some of the tool installation needs, administrative access to the system is recommended to complete assignments.</li> <li>In the event of an emergency or medical challenge, additional flexibility beyond the grading guidelines is available: when anticipated, students should reach out to the instructor as soon as feasible to form a plan or discuss an incomplete if needed.</li> </ul>
<h2>Weekly Schedule</h2>
<h3>Week One: Provocations (Monday, January 12)</h3>
<ul> <li>Matt Ratto, “Critical Making: Conceptual and Material Studies in Technology and Social Life.” (PDF)</li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Provocations for Making”</li> <li><strong>Due: Activity Verification (Friday, January 16)</strong></li> </ul>
<h3>Week Two: Selfie (Monday, January 19)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Unflattening</em> - First Half</li> <li>Kate Durbin, <a href="https://katedurbin.la/hello-selfie/"><em>Hello Selfie</em></a></li> <li>Holly Herndon, <a href="https://paragraph.com/@holly-herndon/holly"><em>Holly+</em></a></li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter One: Selfie”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Three: Comic (Monday, January 26)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Unflattening</em> - Second Half</li> <li>Garnet Hertz, “Making Critical Making.” (PDF)</li> <li>Ilan Manouach, <a href="https://electronicbookreview.com/publications/comics-as-big-data-the-transformation-of-comics-into-machine-interpretable-information/">“Comics as Big Data: The Transformation of Comics into Machine-Interpretable Information”</a> (<em>Electronic Book Review</em>, 2024)</li> <li>Price, Margeret, &amp; Bahl, Erin Kathleen. (2022). <a href="http://kairos.technorhetoric.net/26.2/topoi/price-bahl/index.html">“The rhetoric of description: Embodiment, power, and playfulness in representations of the visual.”</a> <em>Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy</em> 26(2).</li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Two: Comic”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Four: GIF (Monday, February 2)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Your Computer is On Fire</em> - Introductions</li> <li>David Staley, “On the ‘Maker Turn’ in Digital Humanities.” in <a href="https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/projects/making-things-and-drawing-boundaries"><em>Making Things and Drawing Boundaries</em></a></li> <li>Explore: <a href="http://hyperrhiz.io/hyperrhiz21/"><em>Buzzademia</em></a></li> <li>Explore: Jason Helms, <a href="https://www.digitalrhetoriccollaborative.org/rhizcomics/"><em>Rhizcomics</em></a></li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Three: GIF”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Five: Map (Monday, February 9)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Your Computer is On Fire</em> - Part I</li> <li>Nesbit and Ayers, <a href="https://dsl.richmond.edu/emancipation/">“Visualizing Emancipation.”</a></li> <li>Crider and Anderson, <a href="https://kairos.technorhetoric.net/23.2/topoi/crider-anderson/index.html">“Disney Death Tour”</a></li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Four: Map”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Six: Hypertext (Monday, February 16)</h3>
<ul> <li>Rachel Ponce, <a href="http://theappendix.net/special/the-fever">Surviving History: The Fever!</a></li> <li>Christine Wilks, <a href="https://crissxross.net/works/voices/"><em>Voices</em></a></li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Five: Hypertext”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Seven: Game (Monday, February 23)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Your Computer is On Fire</em> - Part II</li> <li>Sabinne Harrer, “Radical Jamming.” (PDF)</li> <li>Niebla Games, <a href="https://nieblagames.itch.io/hawk-and-puma"><em>Hawk &amp; Puma</em></a></li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Six: Game”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Eight: Grammar (Monday, March 2)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Your Computer is On Fire</em> - Part III</li> <li>Leonardo Flores, <a href="https://iloveepoetry.org/?p=5427">“Genre: Bot:”</a></li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Seven: Grammar”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Nine: Analysis (Monday, March 9)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Your Computer is On Fire</em> - Afterwords</li> <li><em>Design Justice</em> - Introduction</li> <li>Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren Klein, “Feminist Data Visualization.” (PDF)</li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Eight: Analysis”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Ten: Spring Break - March 16th - 21st</h3>
<h3>Week Eleven: Generation (Monday, March 23)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Design Justice</em>: Design Values</li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Nine: Generation”</li> </ul>
<ul> <li><em>Design Justice</em>: Design Practices</li> <li>Kathryn Holland and Susan Brown, “Project \ Process \ Product: Feminist Digital Subjectivity in a Shifting Scholarly Field” in <a href="https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/projects/bodies-of-information"><em>Bodies of Information</em></a></li> <li>Lauren Lee McCarthy, <a href="https://lauren-mccarthy.com/SOMEONE"><em>SOMEONE</em></a></li> <li>Johnson and Salter, “Chapter Ten: Crafting Futures in the Age of AI”</li> </ul>
<h3>Week Thirteen: Narratives (Monday, April 6)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Design Justice</em>: Design Narratives</li> <li>Debbie Chachra, “Beyond Making” in <a href="https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/projects/making-things-and-drawing-boundaries"><em>Making Things and Drawing Boundaries</em></a></li> <li>Explore: <a href="https://itch.io/games/made-with-p5js">Games made with P5.js</a></li> <li><a href="https://arij.net/investigations/black-beaches-en/"><em>Black Beaches</em></a></li> </ul>
<h3>Week Fourteen: Combinations (Monday, April 13)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Design Justice</em>: Design Sites</li> <li>Natalie Loveless, <em>How to Make Art at the End of the World</em> (PDF selection in Canvas)</li> <li>Koeser, Doroudian, Budak, Li. “Data Beyond Vision” in <a href="https://startwords.cdh.princeton.edu/"><em>Startwords</em> Issue 1</a></li> </ul>
<h3>Week Fifteen: Futures (Monday, April 20)</h3>
<ul> <li><em>Design Justice</em>: Design Pedagogies</li> <li>Explore: <a href="https://digitalpedagogy.hcommons.org/"><em>Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities</em></a></li> <li>Amy Goodchild, <a href="https://www.amygoodchild.com/art">Generative Artwork</a></li> <li><strong><a href="https://anastasiasalter.net/CriticalMaking2026/exercises/thirteen_multimodal">Optional Making Exercise Thirteen: Multimodal</a></strong></li> </ul>
<h3>Final Reflection (Due Sunday, May 3)</h3>
<ul> <li>Submit &amp; complete your <a href="https://anastasiasalter.net/CriticalMaking2026/exercises/reflection.html">Final Reflection</a>, as well as any approved late work, by the end of finals week!</li> </ul>
<p>Hosted on GitHub Pages — Theme by <a href="https://twitter.com/mattgraham">mattgraham</a></p>
