---
author: Sascha
cover_image: ''
date: '2026-01-20T22:29:43.831Z'
dateFolder: 2026/01/20
description: >-
  Not all note-taking systems are created equal. You can use these universal
  questions to analyze yours and maybe make adjustments in the new year.
isBasedOn: 'https://zettelkasten.de/posts/universal-questions-for-note-taking-system/'
link: 'https://zettelkasten.de/posts/universal-questions-for-note-taking-system/'
slug: 2026-01-20-httpszettelkastendepostsuniversal-questions-for-note-taking-system
tags:
  - tools for knowledge
title: Universal Questions for Any Note-Taking System
---
<p>Dear Zettlers,</p>
<p>Here are some universal questions for any note-taking system.</p>
<ul> <li> <p><strong>What do you want to build for your future self?</strong> <br/> The ability to store a note quickly, for example, benefits your<br/> present self. Possessing a valuable note is what your future self<br/> will be grateful for. Since the Zettelkasten aims to be a lifelong<br/> partner, it is a future-oriented tool. This orientation is<br/> methodologically correct, since you are not keeping notes for<br/> yourself, but for your future self. Your actions should therefore<br/> not be aimed at making it easy now, but valuable, and first and<br/> foremost, to create value in the future.</p> </li> <li> <p><strong>What is the nature of a good note?</strong> <br/> One of the core ideas of the Zettelkasten Method is to ask this<br/> question. There are <a href="https://zettelkasten.de/posts/zettel-nature-two-forms">two parts</a> external, such as the title, tags,<br/> etc., and internal, which is the actual content. I put a heavy<br/> emphasis on this issue because of experience. All too often, I felt<br/> betrayed by my past self, creating a bad note. A more<br/> meta-perspective on the difference between bad and good notes is<br/> that a bad note is a task for your future self. A good note is an<br/> accomplished task that your future self can then build on.</p> </li> <li> <p><strong><a href="https://zettelkasten.de/posts/little-machines/">What are the tools</a> you want to create within your system?</strong> <br/> In my opinion, there is too much emphasis on retrieval in the domain<br/> of personal knowledge management. Yes, sometimes you need to<br/> retrieve a piece of information from your system. But the bigger and<br/> more complex your system is, the less you know what you retrieve.<br/> Imagine you are searching for a new pair of hiking shoes because<br/> your old ones are giving up. You cannot retrieve information. You<br/> also shouldn’t just search for shoes and filter through a big list<br/> of all shoes or all hiking shoes. The best way is to find a page<br/> that explains what makes a good hiking shoe, then offers you a<br/> limited number of options. So, you want an entry point that offers a<br/> limited number of options, guided by concise information. When I,<br/> for example, want to think about the hero’s journey, I don’t just<br/> want to retrieve my notes about the hero’s journey. I want an entry<br/> point that informs me, at the same time, about the most important<br/> lines of thinking. The Zettelkasten shouldn’t just offer a set of<br/> notes but provide a space for notes (mathematically speaking). Why?<br/> Because it is way more valuable and scales to large sets of notes.<br/> That is why I ask myself when processing notes into my Zettelkasten:<br/> What structures can I build that serve as tools for my future self?<br/> I don’t just store notes but create entry points to topics, thinking<br/> canvases, and spines for later lines of thinking.</p> </li> <li> <p><strong>What am I doing that is scaling to an infinite number of notes?</strong><br/> This is a critical question, since the number of notes will be huge<br/> if you stick to one system for the rest of your life. Using tags to<br/> create connections, for example, doesn’t scale. The more you use a<br/> specific tag, the more you dilute already existing connections.<br/> Connections through tags are basically pointers from a particular<br/> note to a growing tag cloud. Direct links are not changing. However,<br/> if you make it a habit to leave the links unexplained, you burden<br/> your future self with the explanation. You will forget why you<br/> connected these notes, and your future self will always have to put<br/> in the additional work of (re-) understanding the connection when it<br/> follows a link. Therefore, to manage uncertainty, you should create<br/> direct links with a diligent explanation/description of the<br/> connection of the ideas/thoughts in the notes.</p> </li> </ul>
<p>Live long and prosper</p>
<p>Sascha</p>
<ul> <li>Tags:  </li> </ul>
