---
author: Clio Chang
cover_image: >-
  https://pyxis.nymag.com/v1/imgs/d7d/e90/f2b26dfcdca95312fc6fb96aaa3606959c-ai--subway-advertisements.1x.rsocial.w1200.gif
date: '2025-12-29T15:23:35.291Z'
dateFolder: 2025/12/29
description: AI and nonsense ads trolled us on our commutes.
isBasedOn: 'https://www.curbed.com/article/tech-ai-ads-nonsense-subway-mta.html'
link: 'https://www.curbed.com/article/tech-ai-ads-nonsense-subway-mta.html'
slug: 2025-12-29-httpswwwcurbedcomarticletech-ai-ads-nonsense-subway-mtahtml
tags:
  - nyc
  - tech
  - marketing
title: The Year of Subway Slop
---
<figure><video autoplay="" loop="" muted="" playsinline=""> <source src="https://player.vimeo.com/progressive_redirect/playback/1147754850/rendition/2160p/file.mp4%20%282160p%29.mp4?loc=external&amp;signature=9585fc0281a34b06d2fd856f394d48598e49f6f28db67036c623101c6631f11f" type="video/mp4"/> <video> </video></video></figure>
<figure><video autoplay="" loop="" muted="" playsinline=""> <source src="https://player.vimeo.com/progressive_redirect/playback/1147754850/rendition/2160p/file.mp4%20%282160p%29.mp4?loc=external&amp;signature=9585fc0281a34b06d2fd856f394d48598e49f6f28db67036c623101c6631f11f" type="video/mp4"/> <video> </video></video></figure>
<p>I was riding the 5 train when I saw an ad above my seat for a company called Brex: “SeatGeek controls spend like a rock star with Brex.” These words have the trappings of a sentence but do not mean anything together. I kept repeating them, like focusing my eyes on an optical illusion and waiting for something to appear. Nothing.</p>
<p>Then I noticed more nonsense subway ads. A banner for a company called Semgrep that reads “Big Number Go Down. Code Security without the noise.” Another: “Every artist has a medium. GTM has clay.” Or Rippling and its crying man: “Software as a Disservice? That’s SaaD.” You might think to yourself: <em>Am I insane?</em></p>
<p>You are not. Marketspeak took over MTA ad space this year. Business-to-business products, many of them with an AI bent that do (do?) things (things?) like “go to market” or “eliminate developer friction.” They are intended for an audience of people with titles like “chief people helper” or “director of employee experience.” Wendy Liu, a writer and former software engineer, <a href="https://bayareacurrent.com/the-billboards-arent-for-you/">calls</a> this phenomenon, which has already taken over the Bay Area, “B2B slop.” It’s almost a given that most public-transit riders aren’t tech executives or VPs of human resources. The ads, Liu writes, may deliver a customer or two in this incredible niche field. But they are also just there to be there: “The economics of the tech industry are a little abstract, more a matter of hope and optics than of reality.”</p>
<p>The images that surround you on your crummy commute tend to foretell distinct eras: See Something, Say Something; COVID etiquette; or the sad man who has erectile dysfunction and must turn away from his confused-looking girlfriend. Ours is becoming techspeak spillage. “We’ve seen a category increase within the last few years, most definitely,” says Ginger Griffin, the VP of New York sales at Outfront Media, the company that operates advertising on the MTA, when I ask her about the ubiquity of these business-to-business ads. According to Outfront’s data, tech ads have increased by 30 percent since last year and now represent 10 percent of advertising spend. The actually kind-of-clever StreetEasy ads are being wiped away by AI start-ups with names like Clay and Delve. Our time commuting is the definition of a captive audience. When you’re avoiding eye contact with everyone else who’s about to transfer at Union Square or only half-listening to your audiobook, there’s basically only one place to look. As the president of the company that previously managed the MTA ads <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/1991/07/21/weekinreview/the-region-how-did-the-subways-get-so-full-of-such-depressing-ads.html">put it</a>: “The doors close and you’re locked in.” (Sinister.)</p>
<p>Perhaps unsurprisingly, no one seems to like ads that are weird and may or may not lead to the elimination of their job somewhere down the line. Or human interaction. When Friend, a start-up that sells a wearable AI device that listens to you and responds through written messages like “I’m here to bring vibes,” took over the entire subway system this fall, commuters started <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2025/10/07/style/friend-ai-subway-ads-new-york.html">defacing the ads</a> and ripping them down. (Phrases like “AI is burning the world around you” and “AI is not your friend,” for example, were written on the ads.)</p>
<p>When I reached out to Brex to try to understand what its ad meant, no one answered. (Same goes for a number of the other companies with gibberish subway ads.) But Brex did have an AI sales rep named Brexton whom I could chat with. He told me the company’s ad “highlights how SeatGeek effectively manages its expenses using Brex’s platform.” When I asked about the rock-star metaphor, Brexton said it was “meant to add a fun twist, emphasizing confidence and boldness in financial management rather than the literal spending habits of rock stars.” I was still confused, but at the risk of being called obtuse by a robot, I simply clicked away. If only that were an option on the Q.</p>
<aside data-track-type="article-list" data-uri="www.curbed.com/_components/related/instances/cmjbr24ab001p3b7a7qkkfurs@published"><ul data-editable="relatedItems"><li><figure></figure></li><li><figure></figure></li></ul></aside>
