---
author: Kuba Suder
cover_image: null
date: '2026-05-31T17:27:04.595Z'
dateFolder: 2026/05/31
description: Kuba Suder's blog on Mac/iOS & web dev
isBasedOn: 'https://mackuba.eu/'
link: 'https://mackuba.eu/'
slug: 2026-05-31-httpsmackubaeu
tags:
  - code
  - decentralization
title: ATProto blog posts collection
---
<p>A bit over a year ago, in the first week of January 2025, I migrated my main Bluesky account to my own PDS on a Netcup VPS. It’s been quite easy to set up using the official installer, and it’s been running pretty much without any problems or maintenance the whole year.</p>
<p>Despite that, I haven’t been 100% happy with this setup for one reason: Docker. So I decided to try to take it out of the box, and I made it run first on the same VPS installed separately, and then moved it to another machine this month with a clean install. This blog post is a guide to how I did this, if you’re interested. There are a few existing posts about this already:</p>
<p>I come across a lot of blog posts about the AT Protocol and Bluesky technicals – both on Bluesky official blogs and those of the team members, and by independent developers from the community. So many people are blogging now (especially now that <a href="https://leaflet.pub">Leaflet</a> got popular in these circles) that I <a href="https://lab.mackuba.eu/3m5tyjv3ssc2p">started using an RSS reader again</a> just to keep up with everything.</p>
<p>These posts are usually shared widely for a day or two, and then kind of forgotten – but a lot of them contain some valuable knowledge that is still relevant much later. Even if someone remembers that something like this has been written, it’s not always easy to dig it out from the archive.</p>
<p>I thought it would be nice to have one place collecting those old and newer blog posts to make them easier to find. So I went through those RSS feeds, my <a href="https://lab.mackuba.eu/3m46zeyme3e6n">like archives</a> and other places, and collected everything I could find here in an organized list. I also included the documents from the <a href="https://github.com/bluesky-social/proposals">“Proposals” GitHub repo</a>, and various posts from the <a href="https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto/discussions">“Discussions” section</a> in the ATProto repo.</p>
<p>This is a subjective selection – from many blogs I skipped some less relevant posts or only included a couple out of many – so if you’re interested, click through to the home page from any post and look for the other posts there.</p>
<p>Since June 2023, I’ve been running a service written in Ruby (Sinatra) that provides several <a href="https://blue.mackuba.eu">Bluesky custom feeds</a> (initially built with a feed for the <a href="https://bsky.app/profile/did:plc:oio4hkxaop4ao4wz2pp3f4cr/feed/apple">iOS/Mac developers community</a> in mind, later expanded to many other feeds). If you don’t know much about Bluesky feeds, you make them by basically running a server which somehow collects and picks existing posts from Bluesky using some kind of algorithm (chronological or by popularity, based on keyword matching, personal likes, whatever you want), and then exposes a specific API endpoint. The Bluesky AppView (API server) then calls your service passing some request parameters, and your service responds with a list of URIs of posts (which the API server then turns into full post JSON and returns to the client app). This lets you share such feed with anyone on the platform, so they can add it to their app and use it like any built-in feed. (If you’re interested, check out my <a href="https://github.com/mackuba/bluesky-feeds-rb">example feed service project</a>.)</p>
<p>In order to provide such service, in practice you need to connect to the Bluesky “firehose” streaming API which sends you all posts made by anyone on the network, and then save either those which are needed for your algorithm, or save all of them and filter later. I chose the latter, since that lets me retry the matching at any time after I modify the keyword lists and see what would be added after that change (and also some of the feeds I now run require having all posts). I also use the same database/service to generate e.g. the <a href="https://blue.mackuba.eu/stats/">total daily/weekly stats here</a>.</p>
<p>Some time ago I wrote a long blog post I called “<a href="https://mackuba.eu/2024/02/21/bluesky-guide/">Complete guide to Bluesky</a>”, which explains how all the user-facing features of Bluesky work and various tips and tricks. This one is meant to be a bit like a developer version of that – I want to explain in hopefully understandable language what all the pieces of the network architecture are and how they all fit together. I hope this will let you understand better how Bluesky and the underlying protocol works, and how it differs from e.g. the Fediverse. This should also be a good starting point if you want to start building some apps or tools on ATProto.</p>
<p>This post is a first part of a series – next I want to look at some comparisons with the Fediverse and some common misconceptions that people have, and look at the state of decentralization of this network, but that was way too much for one post; so this one focuses on the “ATProto intro tutorial” part.</p>
<p>So here we are, halfway through 2025, a bit over 2.5 years after the Eloncalypse… For better or worse, the Twitter as we knew it in the 2010s and the communities we had there are mostly gone. But it doesn’t feel like we’ve all settled on anything comparable.</p>
<p>If you’re a software developer who was active on Twitter before, by now you’ve almost certainly tried at least one of the alternatives – Mastodon, Bluesky, and Threads, and you’re probably posting actively on at least one of these, but probably not on all of them. The problem is that nobody has enough mental space to be active on 3-4 similar social networks, so we’ve split into different camps which only partially overlap. You’re probably still missing some friends from Twitter and some interesting content. It’s all a bit in flux and a bit of a mess.</p>
<p>Myself, I’ve basically left Twitter; I haven’t spent much time on Threads (among other reasons, it was unavailable in Europe for a long time); and I’m mostly hanging out on Bluesky and somewhat on Mastodon.</p>
<p>So where do we go from here?</p>
<p><strong>Update 17.11.2025</strong>: I’ve migrated this journal blog now from Micro.blog to <a href="https://leaflet.pub">Leaflet</a>, a new blogging service built on top of Bluesky’s ATProto. I wrote about this <a href="https://lab.mackuba.eu/3m5tyjv3ssc2p">here</a>, the new URL is <a href="https://lab.mackuba.eu">https://lab.mackuba.eu</a> (I’ll add a redirect from ‘journal’ later).</p>
<p>Just a quick update, if you’re following this blog via RSS: I’ve started a separate “journal” blog on micro.blog: <a href="https://journal.mackuba.eu">journal.mackuba.eu</a>.</p>
<p><a href="https://micro.blog">Micro.blog</a> is an interesting service: it’s a one-man indie business that’s sort of a hybrid between a blogging platform and a microblogging social network. You can write anything between full-size blog posts and tweet-sized single messages, and you can cross-post them to Bluesky, Mastodon etc. You can also follow people from the community that’s formed there and reply to them, all in the form of those mini-blogposts (there are no likes or retweets though). The idea, as I understand, is to use a network of blogs to build a social network that uses the web itself as the foundation.</p>
<p>I’ve been still pretty busy with various Bluesky- and social-related projects recently, so here’s a small update on what I’ve been working on since my <a href="https://mackuba.eu/2023/11/09/year-of-social-media-coding/">November post</a>, if you’re interested:</p>
<h3>Skythread – quote &amp; hashtag search</h3>
<p>I was missing one useful feature that’s still not available on Bluesky: being able to see the number of quote posts a post has received and looking up the list of those quote posts. The Bluesky AppView doesn’t currently collect and expose this info, so it’s not a simple matter of calling the API. But since everything’s open, anyone can build a service that does this, they just need to collect the data themselves.</p>
<p>Since I’m already recording all recent posts in a database for the purposes of feeds and other tools, I figured I could just add an indexed <code>quote_id</code> column and set it to reference the source post on all incoming posts that are quotes, and later look up the quotes using that field.</p>
<p>For the past year and a half, I’ve been a pretty active user of Bluesky. I enjoy it a lot, and I’ve managed to learn a lot about how it works, what works well and what doesn’t, and also what’s likely coming next.</p>
<p>I’ve decided to write down some of the tips &amp; tricks that I often give to friends when I invite them there, or the advice and answers that I sometimes give to people that I find in some feed asking about things.</p>
<p>This of course got much longer than I planned 😅 so if only have a moment, here’s a TLDR:</p>
<ul> <li>there are official <a href="https://apps.apple.com/us/app/bluesky-social/id6444370199">iOS</a> and <a href="https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=xyz.blueskyweb.app">Android</a> apps, but you can also use <a href="https://bsky.app">bsky.app</a> in the browser, or try e.g. <a href="https://apps.apple.com/us/app/skeets-for-bluesky/id6466340923">Skeets</a> (iOS), <a href="https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.gmail.mfnboer.skywalker">Skywalker</a> (Android), or <a href="https://deck.blue">deck.blue</a> (multi-column webapp)</li> <li>tweak the algorithm in your “Discover” feed by opening the “…” context menu on a post in that feed and selecting “Show more like this” or “Show less like this”; or, if you prefer a classic chronological feed, you can set the Following feed as your main feed and remove Discover</li> <li>if your timeline feels empty, you can find some people to follow through <a href="https://blueskydirectory.com/starter-packs">“starter packs”</a>, or you can go to the “Feeds” tab, scroll down to the “Discover New Feeds” section and look for some feeds on the topics that interest you (on the top list or in the search); follow these feeds, and then if you find some interesting people posting in those feeds, follow them too. You can also search for feeds on <a href="https://goodfeeds.co">goodfeeds.co</a>.</li> <li>don’t be afraid to interact with people, repost good posts, like good comments, comment in threads and so on – that’s how you make friends! (but be nice :)</li> <li>if you see too much NSFW stuff, look for “Content filters” settings in the Moderation tab in Settings</li> <li>everything you post here is very public, so don’t share anything too private 😏</li> <li>if you own some cool domain name like “<a href="https://taylorswift.com">taylorswift.com</a>”, you can set it as your handle</li> <li>bookmarks, trends, thread composer, pinned posts, videos, GIFs and DMs (simple version) are now available</li> <li>2FA and more DM stuff are coming, post editing is planned; some version of private posts shared to limited audience is probably coming at some point, but not in near future</li> <li>Jack Dorsey has nothing to do with Bluesky anymore ;)</li> </ul>
<p>And now the long version:</p>
