---
author: esquire.com
cover_image: >-
  https://hips.hearstapps.com/hmg-prod/images/former-us-president-barack-obama-speaks-with-president-news-photo-1753287942.pjpeg?crop=1.00xw:0.745xh;0,0&resize=1200:*
date: '2025-07-24T03:25:36.394Z'
dateFolder: 2025/07/23
description: >-
  He’s trying to get his Epstein involvement out of the news by any means
  necessary.
isBasedOn: 'https://www.esquire.com/news-politics/politics/a65488444/trump-obamas-treason/'
link: 'https://www.esquire.com/news-politics/politics/a65488444/trump-obamas-treason/'
slug: >-
  2025-07-23-httpswwwesquirecomnews-politicspoliticsa65488444trump-obamas-treason
tags:
  - politics
title: 'By Accusing Obama of Treason, Trump Comes Off More Unhinged Than Ever'
---
<div><div data-journey-body="standard-article"><p data-journey-content="true" data-node-id="0">Hold the wire, Central. We have Breaking Crazy from the White House.</p><p data-journey-content="true" data-node-id="1">Last week, Director of National Intelligence Tulsi Gabbard (snort, wheeze, ghack!) delivered a “report” detailing the massive conspiracy led by Barack Obama to undermine the president’s first term via what Gabbard imagines the evidence is. Her report hinges on allegations that Russia hacked the electoral infrastructure, a charge that nobody ever made. (The compelling evidence details how the Russians ran a sophisticated intelligence operation to <em data-node-id="1.1">influence</em> the 2016 election.) Gabbard is throwing around charges of “treason” and “sedition” and the president, desperate to get his involvement with Jeffrey Epstein off the top of the news cycle, has joined in close insane harmony.   He <a data-node-id="1.3" data-vars-ga-call-to-action="enlivened an Oval Office press availability" data-vars-ga-outbound-link="https://www.cnn.com/2025/07/22/politics/trump-obama-treason-accusation-analysis" data-vars-ga-ux-element="Hyperlink" href="https://www.cnn.com/2025/07/22/politics/trump-obama-treason-accusation-analysis" rel="nofollow" target="_blank">enlivened an Oval Office press availability</a> with his latest “thinking.” From CNN:</p><blockquote data-node-id="2">Well, based on what I read, and I read pretty much what you read, it would be President Obama. He started it. And Biden was there with them and [then-FBI Director James] Comey was there and [then-Director of National Intelligence James] Clapper. The whole group was there—[then-CIA Director John] Brennan. They were all there, the—in a room. Right here, this was the room.</blockquote><blockquote data-node-id="3">This [<em data-node-id="3.1">the Oval Office]</em><em data-node-id="3.2"> is much more beautiful than it was then, but that’s okay. I have nice pictures up. They came out of the vaults. They were in there for 100 years. This is much more beautiful. We have the Declaration of Independence now in the room, which wasn’t here. I guess people didn’t feel too good about putting it here, but I do. But you know what? If you look at that—those papers, they have them stone cold, and it was President Obama. It wasn’t lots of people all over the place—it was them too—but the leader of the gang was President Obama, Barack Hussein Obama. Have you heard of him?</em></blockquote><p data-journey-content="true" data-node-id="4">Journalistic objectivity forces us to point out that the president has drenched the Oval in so much gold filigree that it looks like a suite in a Reno whorehouse. And, also, the whiparounds from tacky redecoration to Barack Obama’s alleged treason is evidence of deeply scattered thinking.</p><blockquote data-node-id="5">And except for the fact that he gets shielded by the press for his entire life, that’s the one they—look, he’s guilty. It’s not a question. You know, I like to say, ‘Let’s give it time. It’s there. He’s guilty.’ They—this was treason, this was every word you can think of.</blockquote><p data-journey-content="true" data-node-id="6">I can think of many words. “Lunacy” is one. “Bullshit” is another.</p><blockquote data-node-id="8">They tried to steal the election. They tried to obfuscate the election. They did things that nobody’s ever even imagined, even in other countries. You’ve seen some pretty rough countries. This man [Marcos] has seen some pretty rough countries but you’ve never seen anything like it. And we have all of the documents. And from what I—Tulsi told me, she’s got thousands of additional documents coming.</blockquote><blockquote data-node-id="9">So President Obama, it was his concept, his idea, but he also got it from crooked Hillary Clinton, crooked as a $3 bill. Hillary Clinton and her group, the Democrats, spent $12 million to Christopher Steele to write up a report that was a total fake report. Took two years to figure that out, but it came out that it was a total fake report, it was made-up, fiction. And they used that—now, the one thing they weren’t able to do was to—and probably the only thing I respect about the press in years is the press refused to write it before the election, they refused to put it in. The Steele report was a disaster, all lies, all fabrication, all admitted—an admitted fraud. She paid $12 million, and the Democrats, for that report to a wise guy named Christopher Steele. He wrote a phony report, and they wanted to get that report in before the election.</blockquote><p data-journey-content="true" data-node-id="10">Well, that’s about enough of that. I would caution everyone taking comfort in the fact that the president’s brain is made of tapioca that this all will pass. The DOJ under lapdog Attorney General Pam Bondi is serious about bringing this carload of manure before a grand jury. Former president Obama took it seriously enough to come down from his mountaintop and mix it up, albeit in his typically cool and discursive way, and (alas) <a data-node-id="10.1" data-ogsc="" data-outlook-id="0dfafbae-f175-40f2-a19d-3253c23c9fe0" data-vars-ga-call-to-action="through a spokesman" data-vars-ga-outbound-link="https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/obama-pushes-back-trumps-outrageous-bizarre-treason-claim-rcna220393" data-vars-ga-ux-element="Hyperlink" href="https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/obama-pushes-back-trumps-outrageous-bizarre-treason-claim-rcna220393" rel="nofollow" target="_blank" title="https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/obama-pushes-back-trumps-outrageous-bizarre-treason-claim-rcna220393">through a spokesman</a>. From NBC News:</p><blockquote data-node-id="11">“Out of respect for the office of the presidency, our office does not normally dignify the constant nonsense and misinformation flowing out of this White House with a response,” Obama spokesperson Patrick Rodenbush said. “But these claims are outrageous enough to merit one. These bizarre allegations are ridiculous and a weak attempt at distraction ... Nothing in the document issued last week undercuts the widely accepted conclusion that Russia worked to influence the 2016 presidential election but did not successfully manipulate any votes. These findings were affirmed in a 2020 report by the bipartisan Senate Intelligence Committee, led by then-Chairman Marco Rubio.”</blockquote><p data-journey-content="true" data-node-id="12">Sometimes, lofty simply becomes haughty. You can be above it all and still find yourself in the sewer.</p><p data-ad-exclude="true"></p></div></div>
