---
author: >-
  Ellen Nakashima & Carolyn Y. Johnson & Joseph Menn & Terrence Mccoy & Marina
  Dias & Dan Morse & David Ignatius & Perry Stein & Maegan Vazquez & Warren
  Strobel
cover_image: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-apps/imrs.php?src=https://arc-anglerfish-washpost-prod-washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/ATHVCBTLHR5SPIDB6ZGQFKCBKU.JPG&w=1440
date: '2025-07-23T16:46:32.371Z'
dateFolder: 2025/07/23
description: "Victims of the recent global hacking campaign include\_the National Institutes of Health and the National Nuclear Security Administration, officials said."
isBasedOn: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/07/23/sharepoint-microsoft-hack-nih-nnsa/
link: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/07/23/sharepoint-microsoft-hack-nih-nnsa/
slug: >-
  2025-07-23-httpswwwwashingtonpostcomtechnology20250723sharepoint-microsoft-hack-nih-nnsa
tags:
  - infosec
title: U.S. nuclear and health agencies hit in Microsoft SharePoint breach
---
<div><div><div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="GTDGWBAFRNHP3LN6J47VED5RCE" data-el="text" dir="null">The National Institutes of Health and the federal agency responsible for securing the nation’s nuclear weapons were among the victims in a <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/07/20/microsoft-sharepoint-hack/">global breach of Microsoft server software</a> over the weekend, according to agency officials and other people familiar with the matter.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="AELSABCAOREOHMXWY2GFGTFBRE" data-el="text" dir="null">The NIH breach, which has not been previously reported, involved at least one Microsoft SharePoint server system, said Andrew Nixon, a spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services, and its scope and severity are being investigated.</p></div></div><p></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="HBQR7TUJKRDYJO4LKONA42LRIM" data-el="text" dir="null">The compromise at the National Nuclear Security Administration, an arm of the Department of Energy, did not affect any classified information, said a person familiar with the matter<b> </b>who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss nonpublic matters. It was first reported by <a href="https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2025-07-23/us-nuclear-weapons-agency-breached-in-microsoft-sharepoint-hack">Bloomberg.</a> The NNSA helps keep 5,000 nuclear warheads secure and ready, guards against radiation leaks and ensures that weapons do not mistakenly detonate.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body" data-target-index="1"></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="H3LECANAKFCK7FVC3GFRB5OMOU" data-el="text" dir="null">An internal email written by an NIH information technology official and viewed by The Post said the agency’s cybersecurity team was working to remediate the SharePoint attack, which was part of a <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/07/21/china-hackers-microsoft-sharepoint/">global campaign</a> that targeted government agencies, businesses, universities and other organizations in the United States, Europe and Asia.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="ELMKMKDTOJDHVBXD5CPD67YXS4" data-el="text" dir="null">Hackers connected to the Chinese government were behind at least some of the attacks in the past few days, defenders working on the intrusions said in interviews. Only versions of SharePoint that are hosted by the customer, not those in the cloud, are vulnerable.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="D3JOFVPVAJEZHLA7UR74DOCI64" data-el="text" dir="null">The NIH email said eight servers were disconnected from the internet and isolated. One was compromised, and two showed evidence of attempted breaches that were blocked. The servers taken offline were used to host NIH websites, including websites for the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases and the Fogarty International Center, which supports global health research and trains scientists.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="HLPCWI3Z2RCBHKZTZGRNQVWG3M" data-el="text" dir="null">The National Institutes of Health is the country’s biggest funder of biomedical research, supporting studies that delve into a wide range of basic research and human health conditions.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="USWSLNHCKJGJ3JIP6RQIG5ELTI" data-el="text" dir="null">“We are actively investigating the scope and severity of the incident, while taking all necessary steps to protect sensitive information and strengthen system security with our partners moving forward,” Nixon said. He added that while one server was impacted, others were isolated as a precaution.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="576M8ZQ769323218CW4FP8DP9G" data-el="text" dir="null">The Energy Department “was minimally impacted due to its widespread use of the Microsoft M365 cloud and very capable cybersecurity systems,” a spokesman said. “A very small number of systems were impacted. All impacted systems are being restored, and the department is analyzing whether any sensitive information may have been compromised.”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="TUXJZ5KFRFEJZAYSWQ3GMWQXIM" data-el="text" dir="null">The FBI and other agencies are investigating the compromise of Microsoft’s SharePoint collaboration software. The company has issued patches for the three versions of its software that were affected.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="FQYG7IJZUJEFFBKI46NKEXPO7E" data-el="text" dir="null">A spokeswoman for the Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, which was alerted to the issue on Friday by a cybersecurity firm,  warned Sunday that hackers were exploiting a software flaw that could allow them full access to information being exchanged on the SharePoint systems. That information could include file systems and log-in and password data.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="XM4M4FDVK1311FW0EEDHMCETBW" data-el="text" dir="null">Because SharePoint is often used in tandem with other Microsoft programs including Outlook email and OneDrive storage, security company Palo Alto Networks said breaches that start with SharePoint can go much deeper into sensitive material. Another major concern is that hackers might have left back doors in other places, allowing them to return.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="TCR86XER355H77XD2AFXAHMJA0" data-el="text" dir="null">Security firms helping affected customers said many hacking groups are now trying to exploit the SharePoint flaw and that blueprints for attack methods have been circulating, including on public sites.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="JTCMO5NLKNGOBEQHDZU7D3K5VM" data-el="text" dir="null">The Chinese Embassy did not address the country’s alleged role in the hacking wave, but it questioned the strength of the evidence in past accusations.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="FNVGD72POVGP3LD52H7FENOLNM" data-el="text" dir="null">“Cyberspace is characterized by strong virtuality, difficulty in tracing origins, and diverse actors, making the tracing of cyberattacks a complex technical issue,” embassy spokesman Liu Pengyu said by email. “We hope that relevant parties will adopt a professional and responsible attitude when characterizing cyber incidents, basing their conclusions on sufficient evidence rather than unfounded speculation and accusations.”</p></div></div></div>
