---
author: >-
  Anderson & Ian A. & California Institute Of Technology & Pasadena & Wood &
  University Of Southern California & Los Angeles & E California Blvd & Ca & Ian
  A. Anderson
cover_image: >-
  https://media.springernature.com/m685/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1038%2Fs41598-025-27053-2/MediaObjects/41598_2025_27053_Fig1_HTML.png
date: '2026-02-13T13:11:11.244Z'
dateFolder: 2026/02/13
description: >-
  Overuse of social media is commonly termed a behavioral addiction. However,
  there is reason to believe that users overestimate their addiction; instead,
  frequent use largely builds habits to automatically activate, scroll, post,
  and react on social media. The present research (N = 1204) explored the
  implications of overusing the addiction label. In Study 1, a national quota
  sample of Instagram users (N = 380) overestimated their addiction to the app,
  and those who perceived themselves as more addicted (but not more habitual)
  experienced less ability to control their use. We show that the perception of
  addiction likely arises from popular media’s frequent labeling of social media
  as addictive (vs. habit forming). Study 2 (N = 824) demonstrated
  experimentally that framing frequent Instagram use as an addiction has
  deleterious consequences for user self-efficacy, including reducing perceived
  control over social media use and increasing self-blame for overuse. In
  addition, misperceiving excessive social media use as addictive potentially
  diverts users from effective strategies that could be used to curb overuse
  habits.
isBasedOn: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2'
link: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2'
slug: 2026-02-13-httpswwwnaturecomarticless41598-025-27053-2
tags:
  - social media
title: Overestimates of social media addiction are common but costly
---
<div><div><p>Based on the BIAS symptom scale, only 2% of our quota-based sample of American adults who are active users of <i>Instagram</i> are at risk of being addicted. Nonetheless, on a self-report scale, 18% of participants agreed that they were at least somewhat addicted to <i>Instagram.</i> Even among the 46% of participants using <i>Instagram</i> for about an hour or more daily, only 5% were at risk of being addicted based on their clinical symptoms.</p><p>It is fascinating that so many <i>Instagram</i> users believe that they are addicted when, according to clinical criteria, the risk of addiction is relatively rare. Indicating that the overestimation of addiction is not limited to <i>Instagram</i>, we obtained even more extreme results in a convenience sample of college student <i>TikTok</i> users, with only 9% at risk of addiction compared with 59% estimating that they were at risk (see Supplemental Figure S2). These <i>TikTok</i> results are comparable to the estimates in a recent meta-analysis (i.e., 4–12% addicted) that was also largely based on convenience samples of college students<sup><a aria-label="Reference 4" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR4" title="Cheng, C., Lau, Y., Chan, L. &amp; Luk, J. W. Prevalence of social media addiction across 32 nations: Meta-analysis with subgroup analysis of classification schemes and cultural values. Addict. Behav. 117, 106845. 
                  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2021.106845
                  
                 (2021).">4</a></sup>. The variation in results highlights the importance of using more representative samples to better estimate prevalence.</p><p>In contrast with addiction, most participants in Study 1 reported habits of using <i>Instagram</i>, with 50% of participants who used <i>Instagram</i> an hour or more daily indicating they were habitual, automatic users (i.e., at least somewhat agreed). This result is consistent with research showing that frequent use is largely habitual, reflecting mental associations between cues and responses that automatically drive accessing, scrolling, and responding on social media<sup><a aria-label="Reference 20" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR20" title="Anderson, I. A. &amp; Wood, W. Habits and the electronic herd: the psychology behind social media’s successes and failures. Consum. Psychol. Rev. 4, 83–99. 
                  https://doi.org/10.1002/ARCP.1063
                  
                 (2021).">20</a>,<a aria-label="Reference 21" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR21" title="Anderson, I. A. &amp; Wood, W. Social motivations’ limited influence on habitual behavior: tests from social media engagement. Motiv Sci. 9, 107–119. 
                  https://doi.org/10.1037/mot0000292
                  
                 (2023).">21</a>,<a aria-label="Reference 23" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR23" title="Ceylan, G., Anderson, I. A. &amp; Wood, W. Sharing of misinformation is habitual, not just lazy or biased. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 120, e2216614120. 
                  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2216614120
                  
                 (2023).">23</a>,<a aria-label="Reference 24" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR24" title="Turner, G. et al. A computational model of reward learning and habits on social media (2024).">24</a></sup>.</p><h3>Symptoms of addiction</h3><p>Two clinical symptoms proved to be the strongest signals of social media addiction: <i>withdrawal</i> or feelings of restlessness and trouble if use is prohibited, and <i>life conflict</i> or negative impact on job or studies. Both were experienced at least sometimes by all 9 of our participants at risk of addiction. These symptoms also differentiated addiction from habit; they were more strongly correlated with self-reported addiction than with habit and proved to be unrelated to habit after controlling for addiction.</p><p>It is interesting to speculate why people seem to believe that they are addicted to <i>Instagram</i> despite minimal evidence of pathology. Given that <i>Facebook</i> users who were more frequently exposed to posts about social media addiction rated themselves higher on pathological symptoms such as life conflict and loss of control<sup><a aria-label="Reference 11" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR11" title="Cheng, J., Burke, M. &amp; Davis, E. G. Understanding Perceptions of Problematic Facebook Use: When People Experience Negative Life Impact and a Lack of Control. In: Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13 (2019).">11</a></sup>, one possible explanation is that addiction is a common trope in popular media. Thus, we examined how frequently the term “social media addiction” appeared in news articles and the engagement these articles received from social media users. We suspected that, following the U.S. Surgeon General’s claims of social media addiction, the news media may have encouraged people to believe that the term <i>addiction</i> is the normative descriptor for heavy social media use. If so, users might adopt it even with limited evidence of pathology.</p><p>To assess the popular use of addiction and habit to describe social media, we used <i>Buzzsumo</i>, a media engagement tracking tool, to estimate the number of articles published across all U.S.-based media outlets that contained the phrases “social media addiction” or “social media habit” from November 2021 to November 2024. This tool also tracks the amount of social media engagement on <i>Facebook</i>, <i>Twitter</i>, <i>Reddit</i>, and <i>Pinterest</i> attached to each identified article.</p><p>Addiction proved to be a far more common descriptor than habit, based on the raw number of articles published and the amount of engagement those articles received online (see Table <a data-track="click" data-track-action="table anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#Tab2">2</a>). In addition, over the 36 assessment months, the number of articles discussing “social media habits” never approached the number of articles including the term “social media addiction” (see Fig. <a data-track="click" data-track-action="figure anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#Fig2">2</a>). The stories driving these effects were often lawsuits. For example, the May 2022 and October 2024 peaks for “social media addiction” related to news reporting on multiple lawsuits against <i>Meta</i> (owners of <i>Instagram</i>). In addition, the May 2023 Surgeon General’s warning about social media addiction seems to have contributed to the steady drumbeat of new articles during the April-June 2023 period for “social media addiction.” For “social media habit,” the slight increases come from articles related to tips and tricks for altering one’s social media habits.</p><div data-container-section="table" data-test="inline-table"><figure><figcaption><b data-test="table-caption">Table 2 Number of media mentions of addiction vs. habit.</b></figcaption></figure></div><p>As the engagement numbers in Table <a data-track="click" data-track-action="table anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#Tab2">2</a> imply, these articles are also spread by social media users and accumulate engagement across multiple social media platforms, suggesting that addiction is part of more social media discourse than is habit. This discourse could expose more social media users to the idea of being addicted, as more such articles are disseminated (either by algorithmic feed pickups or by manual user re-sharing) to more users. Study 2’s manipulation was designed to examine what happens to users when they adopt this addiction narrative.</p><p>In sum, these data suggest that, in the present U.S. media, addiction is the normative term to describe heavy social media use. This norm may drive our participants’ tendency to over-attribute their own <i>Instagram</i> use to addiction.</p><div data-container-section="figure" data-test="figure" data-title="Fig. 2"><figure><figcaption><b data-test="figure-caption-text">Fig. 2</b></figcaption><div><div data-test="bottom-caption"><p>Results of Content Tracking Analysis from Buzzsumo. Note. Engagement metrics represent all interactions (likes, shares, replies) from Twitter/X, Facebook, Reddit, and Pinterest. Article quantities may also include YouTube videos.</p></div></div></figure></div><h3>Consequences of self-reported addiction</h3><p>In Study 1, the labeling of frequent <i>Instagram</i> use as an addiction or habit was associated with deficits in self-efficacy. That is, greater self-reported addiction to <i>Instagram</i> was tied to lower perceived control, more past control failures, less success cutting down on use, and greater self-blame for excessive use, suggesting that addiction feelings are connected with users’ sense of control. Notably, habit was not associated with these adverse outcomes in models that controlled for addiction, indicating that reduced control is specific to feelings of addiction.</p><p>Although Study 1 provides initial evidence of the negative effects of labeling social media use as an addiction, its correlational design cannot reveal whether perceived addiction is responsible for and, therefore, drives these negative experiences. Past literature has also been primarily correlational, revealing positive associations between exposure to <i>Facebook</i> posts about addiction and negative outcomes of usage<sup><a aria-label="Reference 11" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR11" title="Cheng, J., Burke, M. &amp; Davis, E. G. Understanding Perceptions of Problematic Facebook Use: When People Experience Negative Life Impact and a Lack of Control. In: Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13 (2019).">11</a></sup>.</p><h3>Study 2: framing Instagram use as addiction can drive negative user outcomes</h3><p>To test the idea that a belief in addiction yields negative consequences, Study 2 experimentally manipulated participants’ perceptions that they were addicted to <i>Instagram.</i> Specifically, we drew on language from the Surgeon General’s 2023 report on social media to replicate the experience of seeing authoritative sources frame social media use as an addiction. Finally, we assessed the consequences of this belief (see preregistration with AsPredicted #192351, <a href="https://aspredicted.org/t5bf-vcn5.pdf">https://aspredicted.org/t5bf-vcn5.pdf</a>	).</p><p>We predicted that participants who first reflected on their own addictive use would experience negative downstream consequences, especially reduced feelings of control over their <i>Instagram</i> use. This impact should be evident across multiple aspects of perceived control, including participants’ past, present, and future control over app use. In addition, we expected that participants who had just self-reflected on their own addiction would blame themselves more for overusing <i>Instagram</i> and would like using <i>Instagram</i> less (less beneficial, less productive, less positive). Accordingly, they should want to use <i>Instagram</i> less than they currently do.</p><h3>Method</h3><p>All protocols, measures, and procedures were approved by the IRB at the University of Southern California (Protocol ID: UP-23–00585). Data collection took place in 2024. All experiments were performed in accordance with the rules of these approved protocols and relevant guidelines and regulations. Informed consent was obtained from all participants involved in this research, and anyone who did not give informed consent was not allowed to proceed further in the study beyond the consent form. Materials, data and code are available via OSF <a href="https://osf.io/3tcqm/overview?view_only=6f3c94fcedd0475ca08638993440b20a">https://osf.io/3tcqm/overview?view_only=6f3c94fcedd0475ca08638993440b20a</a><i>.</i></p><h3>Participants</h3><p>The participants were 824 US-based, English-speaking, adult daily <i>Instagram</i> users recruited from Prolific (<i>N</i> = 398 in the addiction reflection condition and <i>N</i> = 426 in the control condition). Prolific inclusion criteria included a 90% prior approval rate, US-based, English-speaking, adult, active <i>Instagram</i> account holders. Participants were compensated at a rate corresponding to California minimum wage, $16.00/hr, at the time of data collection. See the supplemental materials for justification of the sample size.</p><p>As preregistered (AsPredicted <i>#192351</i>), an additional set of participants were excluded who (a) gave incomplete, incomprehensible, abbreviated, or off-topic answers when self-reflecting about addiction (<i>N</i> = 37) or (b) were not willing or able to reflect on being addicted to <i>Instagram</i> (<i>N = </i>133 in the addiction reflection condition, <i>N = </i>112 in the comparison condition with the reflection task at the end of the study). Finally, two participants were eliminated for indicating they use <i>Instagram</i> 100 h per week (the scale max).</p><h3>Procedure</h3><p>All participants first responded to the BIAS symptom and SRBAI habit automaticity scales. Then they were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: the self-reflection condition, in which they responded to the addiction self-reflection task before completing the self-reported habit and addiction measures, followed by perceived control and self-blame measures, or the comparison condition, in which they completed the self-reported habit and addiction measures, perceived control and self-blame measures before the addiction self-reflection task.</p><p>Below is the full text of the addiction self-reflection task:</p><p>"You have just completed a series of questions that identify different types of <i>Instagram</i> users. Your responses indicate that you use <i>Instagram</i> often. The U.S. Surgeon General has warned that frequent, excessive social media use is addictive. It can be harmful to your mental health and well-being.</p><p>Please write 2–3 sentences below about times you felt addicted to <i>Instagram</i>. If you can’t think of any examples, then write how you imagine this experience would be for you."</p><h3>Measures</h3><p>Self-Reported Habit, Self-Reported Addiction, BIAS Symptom Scale<sup><a aria-label="Reference 33" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR33" title="Andreassen, C. S. et al. The relationship between addictive use of social media and video games and symptoms of psychiatric disorders: A large-scale cross-sectional study. Psychol. Addict. Behav. 30, 252–262. 
                  https://doi.org/10.1037/adb0000160
                  
                 (2016).">33</a></sup>, and SRBAI habit automaticity scale<sup><a aria-label="Reference 38" data-test="citation-ref" data-track="click" data-track-action="reference anchor" data-track-label="link" href="https://nature.com/articles/s41598-025-27053-2#ref-CR38" title="Gardner, B., Abraham, C., Lally, P. &amp; de Bruijn, G. J. Towards parsimony in habit measurement: testing the convergent and predictive validity of an automaticity subscale of the Self-Report habit index. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 9 
                  https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-9-102
                  
                 (2012).">38</a></sup>. These measures were described in Study 1.</p><h3>Control over behavior</h3><p>Participants reported their present ability to curb use on scales ranging from 1 (<i>never true</i>) to 7 (<i>always true</i>): “When I want to, I can curb my <i>Instagram</i> use and not think about or open the app”; “Right now, I feel like I have control over how often I use <i>Instagram;</i>” and “Right now, I feel like I am…” on a scale from 1 (<i>Unsuccessful at reducing my Instagram use</i>,<i> even when I want to</i>) to 7 (<i>Very successful at reducing my Instagram use when I want to</i>). Finally, they indicated, “I predict that, in the future, I will be able to reduce my <i>Instagram</i> use if I want to” on a scale from 1 (<i>strongly disagree</i>) to 7 (<i>strongly agree</i>). These four measures were combined into a single control scale (alpha = 0.84) that ranged from 4 to 28.</p><h3>Number of past control attempts</h3><p>To assess any attempts to reduce use, participants indicated, “How many times have you tried to quit or control your <i>Instagram</i> use in the past few months without success?” (sliding scale 0 to 100). Responses ranged from 0 to 100. Windsorizing the extreme outliers to 1.5 SDs above the mean yielded comparable results to those reported in the text.</p><h3>Blame for overuse</h3><p>On 7-point scales ranging from 1 (<i>strongly disagree</i>) to 7 (<i>strongly agree</i>), participants rated: “When I use <i>Instagram</i> too often, it is because…” “…of my own difficulties controlling my use” and “…the <i>Instagram</i> app is designed to keep people using it.” Obtained responses ranged from 1 to 7.</p><h3>Positive/Negative feelings about Instagram</h3><p>For this 3-item measure, participants indicated “My <i>Instagram</i> use is,” on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (<i>Harmful/Bad/Unproductive)</i> to 5 (<i>Beneficial/Good/Productive</i>). Cronbach’s alpha was 0.84. Responses ranged from 3 to 15.</p><h3>Desire to reduce Instagram use</h3><p>Measured as: “Right now, I wish I used <i>Instagram</i> less frequently than I currently do” on a scale from 1 (<i>Strongly Disagree</i>) to 7 (<i>Strongly Agree</i>). Responses ranged from 1 to 7.</p></div></div>
