---
author: >-
  Will Oremus & Benjy Sarlin & Adam Carlson & Jim Geraghty & Matt Viser & Sammy
  Westfall & Tobi Raji & Cate Brown & Kadia & Katie Tarrant
cover_image: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-apps/imrs.php?src=https://arc-anglerfish-washpost-prod-washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/YUU7Z6ZAOURV3B3V6XBFOZ4LRY.jpg&w=1440
date: '2025-09-09T16:37:39.458Z'
dateFolder: 2025/09/09
description: >-
  First Amendment lawyer Jenin Younes backed anti-vaccine activists against the
  Biden administration’s covid restrictions. Now she is ready to sue the Trump
  administration for suppressing free speech.
isBasedOn: 'https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/09/09/first-amendment-trump/'
link: 'https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/09/09/first-amendment-trump/'
slug: 2025-09-09-httpswwwwashingtonpostcomtechnology20250909first-amendment-trump
tags:
  - politics
  - free speech
  - law and order
title: >-
  Jenin Younes took Biden to the Supreme Court over free speech. She says Trump
  is worse.
---
<div><div><div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="OSKRT3DARNFYPC4XG4SEJPLFZQ" data-el="text" dir="null">Jenin Younes keeps having to find new allies.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="4JGYGHK3SRBIXLP34ETIT2HWZM" data-el="text" dir="null">She was a 36-year-old public defender in New York City when covid-19 swept in, prompting lockdowns and mask mandates that struck her as heavy-handed. Her increasingly vocal online criticism of those policies alienated her from her left-leaning social and professional circles. But it won her new friends on the right — and new prominence as a First Amendment lawyer who sued the Biden administration for alleged censorship in a case that reached the Supreme Court.</p></div></div><p></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="5IPCO2747JFADKUWXWMHDZVXM4" data-el="text" dir="null">Since President Donald Trump returned to the White House, though, Younes has bristled at what she believes is an even greater and more overt crackdown on speech. She contends that his administration is suppressing anti-Israel activism through policies and pressure campaigns that have led to people losing jobs, getting kicked out of colleges or even being deported.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="BRGACNERVRHH5ADE3R4DDFBOY4" data-el="text" dir="null">That has prompted a dramatic career move. Late last month, Younes left her job at a right-leaning legal center to become national legal director for a nonprofit dedicated to protecting Arab Americans from discrimination.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="SURXF55MIJAPBIWMM6VKPUTDCU" data-el="text" dir="null">There she plans to embark on a new slate of First Amendment lawsuits. Among her likely targets: the Trump administration, where some of her former clients hold prominent posts.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="NUNK2OD2ZJHGFA2GA422G43ZCM" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes points to the administration’s efforts to deport student activists, its policy of vetting would-be immigrants’ <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2025/06/18/student-visas-social-media-vetting-state-department/" target="_blank">social media accounts</a>, and the <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2025/07/18/antisemitism-task-force-dei-universities-trump/" target="_blank">pressure it has exerted</a> on colleges to discipline students and professors involved in campus anti-Israel protests. She recounts the story of Rumeysa Ozturk, a Turkish student at Tufts University who was <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2025/05/09/judge-orders-rumeysa-ozturk-release-tufts-student/" target="_blank">grabbed off the street</a> by masked federal agents in March after co-writing an <a href="https://www.tuftsdaily.com/article/2024/03/4ftk27sm6jkj" target="_blank">opinion article</a> in the student newspaper.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="E42WLW4R75DGRL3F2TYUO5WFKI" data-el="text" dir="null">“This is way worse than anything Biden did,” Younes<b> </b>said. “This is completely insane.”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="66VWUW2M6JB4TJAGPJL7E3YXFI" data-el="text" dir="null">Two of her clients in the case against Biden serve in the Trump administration. Then-Stanford University health economist Jay Bhattacharya is now the head of the National Institutes of Health, and former Harvard Medical School professor Martin Kulldorff is chairman of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s advisory panel for immunization policy. And one of Younes’s co-counsels on the case, former Missouri solicitor general D. John Sauer, is now solicitor general of the United States.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="TJSFWLYXSVDR7LYHPX7QGJJOAU" data-el="text" dir="null">To conservatives who once cheered her on, Younes’s pivot is vexing. “We no longer follow each other on X,” said Ilya Shapiro, director of constitutional studies at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, who wrote an amicus brief supporting her case against the Biden administration but rejects her view of the Trump administration’s actions.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="6VPLOVFMZJEOXOKDSVK4GMLY7Y" data-el="text" dir="null">Others, including a prominent researcher who studied covid-19 conspiracy theories, aren’t ready to forgive her for participating in a congressional investigation overseen by Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio) that <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/09/23/online-misinformation-jim-jordan/" target="_blank">targeted misinformation researchers</a> and fact-checkers.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="NXY6AWPQI5GRFHAEA2YNGOPTVM" data-el="text" dir="null">But in Younes’s view, she is not the one pivoting. She sees herself standing firm behind the First Amendment while the political world pivots around her.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="COOPA7NA7RDGRLVOOAC2JFMB4E" data-el="text" dir="null">“Nobody ever says, ‘We’re censoring protected speech’” when they call for doing just that, Younes said. “They say it’s misinformation, or it’s support of terrorism, or it’s antithetical to American values.”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"><h2 data-apitype="header" data-contentid="5ZMISYPRHZD6ZFGXYGEKH65SIE" data-testid="article-header">‘Lefty Lockdown Skeptic’</h2></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="MHZWIXUWPFCFLKW46YWAAMV3F4" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes was born in Saudi Arabia to a Palestinian father and an American mother. Her maternal grandfather, who was born to a Jewish family and converted to Christianity, had fled Nazi Germany because of rising antisemitism. Having met as doctoral students at the University of Texas, Younes’s parents returned to the United States when she was 2. She grew up listening to her father’s stories of oppression — first by Jordanian, and then Israeli occupiers of his native West Bank.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="C7EPQCXCSRFPFPZG5E6PAFLCVY" data-el="text" dir="null">“He often pointed out how the media misrepresented Palestine — for example, how headlines would highlight attacks by Hamas but bury the deaths of Palestinians in a footnote,” she said. “That skepticism of power and of mainstream narratives deeply influenced me.”</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="VWRCLGEHSVFZHPW6I2MJM7ZNJQ" data-el="text" dir="null">When schools and businesses closed in 2020, Younes said, she feared the impacts would fall heaviest on the poor and vulnerable, based on her experience as a public defender. What began to irk her even more, she said, was the sense that “you couldn’t even talk about it. People got really mad at me for even raising questions … [acting] like I want old people to die because I think we should think through the collateral consequences” of lengthy pandemic restrictions.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="D3YQWTWIMBF4DPSWTCTHZ67DPQ" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes, who says she had never voted for a Republican and backed Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vermont) for president in 2016, started a Twitter account under the pseudonym “Lefty Lockdown Skeptic” and penned an op-ed arguing that <a href="https://thedailyeconomy.org/article/whats-gone-wrong-with-left-liberalism-and-lockdowns/" target="_blank">the left should oppose lockdowns</a>. She was quickly embraced by the contrarian intellectual movement that in October 2020 issued the <a href="https://gbdeclaration.org/" target="_blank">Great Barrington Declaration</a>, a proposal to <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/covid-herd-immunity/2020/10/10/3910251c-0a60-11eb-859b-f9c27abe638d_story.html" target="_blank">loosen covid-19 restrictions</a> whose authors included Kulldorff and Bhattacharya.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="HGHN7HG4ORGVTNGLC5TXKWHW7Y" data-el="text" dir="null">Like them, Younes periodically found her tweets labeled or removed for running afoul of Twitter’s policies prohibiting “potentially misleading misinformation” about the covid-19 pandemic or vaccines — policies <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/biden-vaccine-social-media/2021/07/16/fbc434bc-e666-11eb-8aa5-5662858b696e_story.html" target="_blank">the Biden administration actively supported</a>, including by flagging posts for Twitter, Facebook and other social platforms to take down. Twitter has since been renamed X, which like other platforms has backed away from policing misinformation. (Younes says she is “not an antivaxxer” but harbored concerns about the safety of the rapidly developed coronavirus vaccines and opposed mandates for people to take them.)</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="FSH5ZKYGK5CBLGBPCOM3MMNJLI" data-el="text" dir="null">The Republican attorneys general of Missouri and Louisiana sued the Biden administration, alleging that it had violated the First Amendment by colluding with tech firms to suppress Americans’ protected political speech. Bhattacharya and Kulldorff joined the suit<b>, </b>originally titled <i>Missouri v. Biden,</i> as individual plaintiffs. They chose Younes, who had recently moved to Washington to take a job as a lawyer at the libertarian New Civil Liberties Alliance, to represent them.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="MBOL755QPJECDEBGPH4YMXIJWA" data-el="text" dir="null">A Trump-appointed federal judge in Louisiana proved receptive to their arguments, issuing a sweeping injunction that <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/07/04/biden-social-lawsuit-missouri-louisiana/" target="_blank">blocked contacts between the Biden administration and tech companies</a>. The administration appealed, and the case reached the Supreme Court in 2024<b> </b>as <i>Murthy v. Missouri</i>.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="M2LIF3XIZBD3ZJG76DXTZ3U4RY" data-el="text" dir="null">There, six of the nine justices <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2024/06/26/supreme-court-social-media-white-house/" target="_blank">sided largely with Biden</a>, reversing the lower court’s order. Noting that the social media platforms’ misinformation policies predated any pressure from the administration, they found that the plaintiffs had failed to show that their specific posts were censored as a result of anything Biden officials said or did.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="RJ7CTE3AMFBDBNYL7G7IQA6SFE" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes still believes those justices, who included the court’s three liberals, were wrong. And she argues their ruling could unwittingly enable Trump’s own “jawboning” of nongovernmental institutions such as companies and universities.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="GUBFJQSUCVBHFLBO27RPNKELXM" data-el="text" dir="null">For example, she said, the Trump administration has withheld billions in federal funding from universities over their handling of antisemitism — implicitly pressuring the schools to crack down on anti-Israel protesters. But if a school were to respond by disciplining students or faculty for speech that is protected by the First Amendment, Younes said, the <i>Murthy </i>ruling could make it harder for them to show that the government’s actions were to blame.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"><h2 data-apitype="header" data-contentid="CZ3R2JNLEJEO7DGAAIXUFLMRLM" data-testid="article-header">‘A total about-face’</h2></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="PIRP2HDZYBG33GGGR3MDSGIP4I" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes’ clients lost the Supreme Court battle but won the political war.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="TPTS2MTLZBBOLOI2EIVRZAHH2M" data-el="text" dir="null">Since Trump’s return to the White House, the federal government has discontinued most of its work on social media misinformation. Leading social networks have <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/01/07/meta-factchecking-zuckerberg/" target="_blank">recoiled from fact-checking</a> and <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2025/02/25/meta-facebook-instagram-hate-speech/" target="_blank">loosened their speech rules</a>.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="PURUEQLRGVDB3CI7C5AQTPFOAQ" data-el="text" dir="null">Bhattacharya, once exiled from the public health establishment for his covid-19 contrarianism, has presided over <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2025/08/21/supreme-court-nih-grants-diversity-equity-inclusion-trump/" target="_blank">huge cuts</a> in the NIH research budget. He said upon taking the helm of the NIH in April that he sees its mission as “fostering gold-standard research and innovation.” Under the guidance of Health and Human Services Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Kulldorff’s CDC advisory panel appears <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2025/08/30/cdc-vaccines-rfk-jr-future/" target="_blank">poised to rescind</a> some immunization recommendations at its mid-September meeting, according to agency scientists and the leaders who resigned last month. “Vaccines are not all good or bad,” Kulldorff said at the panel’s first meeting in June.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="SC7ZMRTUKNBB3LFR6MCFQ73DMQ" data-el="text" dir="null">One of Trump’s first official acts was to issue an <a href="https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/restoring-freedom-of-speech-and-ending-federal-censorship/" target="_blank">executive order</a>, “Restoring Freedom of Speech and Ending Federal Censorship,” which promised to end what it said was the previous administration’s practice of pressuring social media companies to suppress speech “under the guise of combatting ‘misinformation.’”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="X7NF5PUMUJANLB32BVXPT6IGYU" data-el="text" dir="null">But far from ending government censorship, as Younes sees it, Trump has been<b> </b>pursuing his own crackdown on political dissent alongside some of her former allies.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="ZKLHYHBHYZCO3ANIABALBHISCQ" data-el="text" dir="null">In 2023, Younes spent several months working for Jordan’s House select subcommittee on the Weaponization of the Federal Government, where she helped to lead an investigation into what he called the “censorship-industrial complex.” A star witness at one of the hearings was Kennedy, whose testimony in defense of free speech, Younes recalls, “moved me to tears.”</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="NV3SX265ZREY3AF4275MMZ7JYA" data-el="text" dir="null">A year later, as Trump’s health secretary, Kennedy was helping to spearhead the federal government’s Task Force to Combat Antisemitism and pulling federal research funding from academic institutions over their handling of campus protests.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="JBVKQKBGMNABVIQM4VNDX3RVJI" data-el="text" dir="null">“It’s a total about-face,” she said of Kennedy. “I think a lot of people have shown it’s just political for them. It’s not about free speech.”</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="PNALPSQDTNGQRAW6JAZUA7ALEM" data-el="text" dir="null">Kennedy did not respond to requests for comment. Sauer’s office also did not respond to a request for comment. Bhattacharya declined to comment for this story.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="ZNMBHKIQQNFEPDFFUWN332GVLI" data-el="text" dir="null">“Jenin Younes is an excellent and principled attorney, and I greatly appreciate the work she did representing me and three of my co-plaintiffs in <i>Missouri vs. Biden,</i>” Kulldorff said via email. He<b> </b>declined to offer his thoughts on Younes’s critiques of the Trump administration.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"><h2 data-apitype="header" data-contentid="DJWO42JS55DFJG3634A4DWMAHI" data-testid="article-header">‘The most egregious free-speech violations of my lifetime’</h2></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="TYWSPB4V2FGHFCYQPE32M7EJFA" data-el="text" dir="null">As Israel’s campaign in Gaza unfolded, Younes grew restless to pursue cases related to pro-Palestinian speech — a cause that had sparked in her the same anger she once felt over the covid-19 lockdowns.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="B5O6SQXOG5CVFDJT6I4I3QOILE" data-el="text" dir="null">“Once Trump took office, I wanted to challenge what I saw as the most egregious free-speech violations of my lifetime,” Younes said.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="WJN7BB2Z7VE45IWQUMOJNLX7AU" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes said she believes antisemitism is a real problem<b>, </b>denounced Hamas’s Oct. 7, 2023, attack on Israeli civilians, and acknowledged that some campus anti-Israel protests have gotten “out of control.” But she said the Trump administration has mischaracterized anger toward Israel as antisemitism to demonize protesters and bring academic institutions to heel.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="UHNAAKPCXRCPHM2QHPGNPESXKY" data-el="text" dir="null">This month, she began her new job leading a small legal team at the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee, or ADC, a civil rights organization founded in 1980. Her former employer, the New Civil Liberties Alliance, did not respond to requests for comment on Younes’s departure.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="QE3ITX263FHLBNT4YGCAVYHHS4" data-el="text" dir="null">Abed Ayoub, the ADC’s executive director, said the choice of an accomplished First Amendment lawyer reflects what he sees as<b> </b>the growing threats to Arab Americans’ freedom of speech since the war in the Gaza Strip began. He pointed to the <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2025/07/10/mahmoud-khalil-lawsuit-trump-administration-ice/" target="_blank">months-long detention of Mahmoud Khalil</a>, a Columbia University student activist who was arrested in March without a warrant for what Trump later said was his involvement in “pro-jihadist” activities, as a pivotal moment.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="K4LGFIQUWBEC3AOPJQERFUHO6Y" data-el="text" dir="null">“I was born and raised in Detroit, and the first time in my life I was really worried about the direction of this country — the first time I was really afraid — was the arrest of Mahmoud Khalil,” Ayoub said. “That’s when we knew, ‘Okay, this is going to be <i>the </i>issue. We need to be front and center on this.’”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"><h2 data-apitype="header" data-contentid="ULSTBFC7UJA6JAW4LN4GC54M5U" data-testid="article-header">‘I think it’s complete hogwash’</h2></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="I73YITVG6ZAMPBUVFMPHHQMKRU" data-el="text" dir="null">Renée DiResta, a research professor at Georgetown University who studies online influence, says she<b> </b>doesn’t buy the idea that Younes is a free-speech warrior. She said Younes played a key role in a <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/06/06/disinformation-researchers-congress-jim-jordan/" target="_blank">Republican-led intimidation campaign</a> to stifle the lawful speech of <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/09/23/online-misinformation-jim-jordan/" target="_blank">academic researchers </a>like her.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="5PFR2PIK3FEL7B3SAEQOJWAZ3U" data-el="text" dir="null">“She used her power on the Weaponization committee to target and smear dozens of researchers whose speech she didn’t agree with, reframing research as a plot and its participants as a cabal,” DiResta said.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="HURVCC7FHRA77NKPZYXGS5UCG4" data-el="text" dir="null">DiResta was research manager at the Stanford Internet Observatory when Jordan’s subcommittee subpoenaed the research center, accusing her and others of colluding with the government to censor social media posts. After Jordan <a href="https://x.com/JudiciaryGOP/status/1664399643113914369?s=20" target="_blank">threatened legal action</a> against Stanford University for not fully complying with his records requests, it <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2024/06/14/stanford-internet-observatory-disinformation-research-lawsuits-politics/" target="_blank">disbanded the observatory</a> in 2024.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="WMBD5J5PFVGDXL6AVHSMZQVASY" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes, DiResta said, is “concerned about the affronts to the free speech rights of those who share her ideological beliefs, but willing to twist facts to target those who don’t.”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="XGOW6YBTQZFZXMTG32OW3AGWEM" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes said she often defends the speech of clients whose views she disagrees with.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="3T5MQH5KDJCRPEB5AP4FANZDNU" data-el="text" dir="null">A pair of First Amendment experts rejected the comparison Younes draws between Biden and Trump — but for opposite reasons.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="TAVC35FCTNAGXE7XLEXKUZPD7A" data-el="text" dir="null">“I think it’s complete hogwash,” said Shapiro of the Manhattan Institute. Trump isn’t pressuring colleges to censor speech, he said, but to afford Jewish students the same protection from harassment and disruption of their education it would afford any other group.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="VCJM4NQP45DADCOH4E6DUJO6KQ" data-el="text" dir="null">“If a bunch of people dressed up in KKK robes were chanting white supremacist slogans and burning crosses” on major college campuses, Shapiro said, “I don’t think anyone would bat an eyelash at universities cracking down on that. It creates an environment that is hostile to learning.”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="2AC6MEUDE5HJDL6SADRJQSKCXU" data-el="text" dir="null">Alex Abdo, litigation director at Columbia University’s Knight First Amendment Institute, said there’s no question Trump is suppressing disfavored speech. And while Biden and his deputies made efforts to “persuade or pressure” social media companies, he added, that alone does not violate the Constitution unless it comes with threats to punish them if they don’t comply.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="4TXSMUCAPRFPFFAVFEXL233GQA" data-el="text" dir="null">Trump, he said, has crossed that line, engaging in “one of the most brazen attacks on free speech we’ve seen in decades,” Abdo said.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="K7TEKZR2AZFVZCTZ4JKDG5HU5M" data-el="text" dir="null">“As a candidate, Trump attacked Biden for pressuring social media companies to police disinformation,” he said. “But as president, he’s using the government to punish his political opponents. To call this hypocritical is a wild understatement.”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="G4CVQPPVVVCN3GWDANEWMTIV6Q" data-el="text" dir="null">By now, Younes is accustomed to taking heat from all sides. Her profile on X reads, “Cancelled by left for covid views &amp; right for Palestine views.”</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="IFCJPFZUDJEQ7HXUQXAR4MVUOM" data-el="text" dir="null">She also dishes out tweets that she admits are sometimes ill-advised — like a recent one that compared pro-Israel journalist Bari Weiss, who is Jewish, to the Nazi master propagandist Joseph Goebbels. Younes quickly deleted the post, saying it was “obviously hyperbolic” and dashed off in a moment of pique. Weiss did not respond to a request for comment.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="EY4T6WZCBZBYHLO5L3VV6ITPOE" data-el="text" dir="null">Younes said she has become accustomed to receiving slurs and threats on social media from people outraged or offended by her views. While she doesn’t enjoy the experience, she said it does inform her work.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="IGTXHZ3UBJGKDFRRZ2RRTFQUYQ" data-el="text" dir="null">“It makes me even more committed to the idea that people need to engage with ideas rather than attempt to silence them,” she said.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-qa="correction-disclaimer"><span data-testid="disclaimer-headline">correction</span><span data-apitype="correction" data-contentid="WOCGOVHBY5EABIQILJKZ5BPM64" data-testid="disclaimer-description">A previous version of this article incorrectly said the Great Barrington Declaration to loosen covid-19 restrictions was issued in October 2022. It came out in October 2020.  </span></p></div></div></div>
