---
author: Tim Cushing
cover_image: 'http://img.youtube.com/vi/oOQu4zQqiOY/0.jpg'
date: '2025-11-13T07:28:31.808Z'
dateFolder: 2025/11/13
description: >-
  We’ll see where this goes from here, but for the moment, this order [PDF],
  issued by federal judge Karin Immergut still stands: For the above reasons,
  this Court concludes that Plaintiffs hav…
isBasedOn: >-
  https://www.techdirt.com/2025/11/12/federal-court-issues-injunction-permanently-blocking-deployment-of-military-troops-to-portland/
link: >-
  https://www.techdirt.com/2025/11/12/federal-court-issues-injunction-permanently-blocking-deployment-of-military-troops-to-portland/
slug: >-
  2025-11-13-httpswwwtechdirtcom20251112federal-court-issues-injunction-permanently-blocking-deployment-of-military-troops-to-portland
tags:
  - baselines
  - law and order
title: >-
  Federal Court Issues Injunction Permanently Blocking Deployment Of Military
  Troops To Portland
---
<h3>from the <i>inflatable-frogs-1,-pete-hegseth-0</i> dept</h3>
<p>We’ll see where this goes from here, but for the moment, this <a data-id="https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/26222005-portland-national-guard/" data-type="link" href="https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/26222005-portland-national-guard/">order</a> [PDF], issued by federal judge Karin Immergut still stands:</p>
<blockquote> <p><em>For the above reasons, this Court concludes that Plaintiffs have demonstrated that Defendants violated 10 U.S.C. § 12406 and the Tenth Amendment and satisfy the requirements for a permanent injunction. Therefore, this Court PERMANENTLY ENJOINS Defendants Pete Hegseth, the U.S. Department of Defense, Kristi Noem, and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security from […] federalizing and deploying members of the National Guard in Oregon</em></p> </blockquote>
<p>This has <a data-id="https://www.techdirt.com/2025/10/07/doj-moves-goalposts-to-send-troops-to-portland-gets-shut-down-by-a-federal-court/" data-type="link" href="https://www.techdirt.com/2025/10/07/doj-moves-goalposts-to-send-troops-to-portland-gets-shut-down-by-a-federal-court/">already happened once</a>. And, for reasons that went mostly unexplained by two of three judges ruling in favor of the administration, <a data-id="https://storage.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.ca9.b3c1c6b0-b390-4c9d-b557-fc5d525fd150/gov.uscourts.ca9.b3c1c6b0-b390-4c9d-b557-fc5d525fd150.61.0.pdf" data-type="link" href="https://storage.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.ca9.b3c1c6b0-b390-4c9d-b557-fc5d525fd150/gov.uscourts.ca9.b3c1c6b0-b390-4c9d-b557-fc5d525fd150.61.0.pdf">a stay was issued</a> that allowed it to continue exploring its martial law options in a city Trump has already admitted <a data-id="https://www.techdirt.com/2025/09/30/so-donald-trump-is-declaring-war-on-us-cities-based-on-fake-fox-news-footage-and-nonsense-his-people-tell-him/" data-type="link" href="https://www.techdirt.com/2025/09/30/so-donald-trump-is-declaring-war-on-us-cities-based-on-fake-fox-news-footage-and-nonsense-his-people-tell-him/">he might have been lied to about</a> in terms of civil unrest.</p>
<p>The judges blocking the injunction basically said we have to trust the government, even when it’s obviously lying to us — <a data-id="https://www.techdirt.com/2025/10/21/9th-circuit-judge-blasts-colleagues-for-enabling-trumps-unconstitutional-military-invasion-of-portland/" data-type="link" href="https://www.techdirt.com/2025/10/21/9th-circuit-judge-blasts-colleagues-for-enabling-trumps-unconstitutional-military-invasion-of-portland/">something pointed out in the sharp dissent</a> written by the third judge in the case (Susan Graber). Her dissent noted that most of the protest involved people wearing inflatable animal costumes (<a data-id="https://apnews.com/article/portland-oregon-naked-bike-ride-protest-43ecafc5f5ce0a7d7f44dc016fbe86d0" data-type="link" href="https://apnews.com/article/portland-oregon-naked-bike-ride-protest-43ecafc5f5ce0a7d7f44dc016fbe86d0">and, memorably, <em>nothing at all</em></a><em>)</em>. It also noted the absolute dearth of calls from law enforcement for backup when dealing with Portland’s (non-threatening) protesters. Her dissent also pointed out how none of this could possibly add up to the clear and present danger the administration has used to justify the deployment of National Guard troops.</p>
<p>The “threat” asserted by Trump, Hegesth, Noem, and others <a data-id="https://bsky.app/profile/did:plc:iohewl4fc7oyxy3solhq6bdi/post/3m2fmqrnjtk2q" data-type="link" href="https://bsky.app/profile/did:plc:iohewl4fc7oyxy3solhq6bdi/post/3m2fmqrnjtk2q">was mostly a lot of this</a>:</p>
<figure><div class="rw-embed-wrapper"><embed src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/oOQu4zQqiOY?feature=oembed" type="video/mp4"/></div></figure>
<p>Judge Immergut makes many of the same points: there’s no real threat, the protests have been almost exclusively peaceful, and the government has lied so often it should not be granted judicial deference. The 106-page order practically dares the Ninth Circuit to again ignore the facts on the ground when it is inevitably appealed by the federal government.</p>
<p>For example, here’s the judge taking the government down a few notches (and suggesting contempt findings are perhaps just as inevitable as the administration’s routine disregard for legal precedent) for pretending it didn’t have time to comply with the first order while it simultaneously scrambled troops from out-of-state in an attempt to skirt the expected restraining order:</p>
<blockquote> <p><em>Ordinarily, this Court would be inclined to accept Defendants’ explanation for their violation of the First TRO [temporary restraining order] given that “the first shift” at the Portland ICE facility commenced prior to this Court’s issuance of the First TRO. However, in light of the following facts, this Court is deeply troubled by Defendants’ continued deployment of Oregon National Guardsmen at the Portland ICE facility in violation of the First TRO. <strong>In the seven hours that Defendants took to “convey the message” of the First TRO “to people on the ground,” Defendants simultaneously “convey[ed] the message” to the U.S. Army Northern Command to send 200 of the federalized California National Guard personnel in Los Angeles to Portland. In other words, Defendants had time to order and coordinate the transport of federalized California National Guardsmen from Los Angeles to Portland but needed more time to communicate with the Oregon National Guardsmen at the Portland ICE facility.</strong></em></p> </blockquote>
<p>The dissent to the Ninth Circuit opinion — combined with the administration’s attempt to circumvent the court order blocking deployment of <em>Oregon</em> National Guard troops by sending in a bunch of troops from other states — has resulted in a successful petition for an <em>en banc</em> hearing by Judge Susan Graber. That means the government is far less likely to see its bluster, outright lies, and end around plays entertained by a far more representative group of Ninth Circuit judges.</p>
<p>Furthermore, the alleged “escalation” cited by the Trump administration is simply a lie, as those who’ve been on the ground (Portland Police Bureau officials) have already (credibly, according to the court) testified:</p>
<blockquote> <p><em><strong>Any riotous activity affecting the Portland ICE building peaked in June and had subsided for months before the President’s September 27, 2025 callout of the National Guard to Oregon. </strong>Regarding the nature of the crowd and its behavior, this Court finds the following. First, the size of the crowds decreased dramatically from June to September. Second, the number of officers briefly increased in response to the peak activity in mid-June, but it quickly subsided and remained at a low steady state until September 27, 2025. Third, the crowd was not directed by an organized group. Fourth, members of the crowd were rarely armed. Fifth and finally, the crowd’s shift in focus from the ICE building and the federal personnel in June to counter protester disputes in September demonstrates that much of the activity since mid-June had little to no effect on the ICE building and federal operations.</em></p> </blockquote>
<p>And these are things that were happening most of time, according to local law enforcement leaders:</p>
<blockquote> <p><em>From September 19 to September 28, immediately before the National Guard callout, there was “[n]othing much” going on outside the ICE building. <strong>Throughout the protests, PPB Commander Schoening testified that protesters wore “inflatable costumes.” Similarly, PPB Assistant Chief Dobson described “folks in costumes” at the ICE Facility, as well as “other almost festive-type events going on down there,” including “dance parties.”</strong></em></p> </blockquote>
<p>Also: the government — the <em>federal</em> government, that is — can’t seem to stop lying:</p>
<blockquote> <p><em>To the extent that it lacks corroboration from other sources of evidence, the Court does not find reliable <strong>ICE/ERO Field Office Director Wamsley’s characterization of the damage to the Portland ICE Facility, which suggested damage was more extensive than that which is reflected in the rest of the record</strong>.</em></p> <p><em><strong>There is no credible evidence, however, that all the doors and windows of the ICE facility were broken. No other witness described damage to this degree, including Commander W.T., who was at the Portland ICE Facility every other week the entire summer.</strong> Additionally, Director Wamsley testified that she did not know whether there would be any photos of this damage or whether there was any documentation of the repair estimates.</em></p> </blockquote>
<p>It does it <em>all the time</em>, even when it has to <em>know</em> its lies will be exposed:</p>
<blockquote> <p><em>Furthermore, PPB reporting from June 14 show additional inconsistencies in the federal government’s version of events. PPB Captain Schoening’s activity log documented: “ICE calling saying they are barricaded in the building and fire lit. <strong>Difficult to get accurate information from them. What they say is happening is frequently contradicted by video feeds and subsequent activity.</strong> Air 1 shows no fire.” Also, <strong>shortly after they reported being barricaded, PPB observed an FPS employee exit a door</strong> and noted that FPS “ha[d] been using th[at] door regularly for employee ingress/egress. <strong>Th[at] door was reported earlier to be barricaded</strong>.” </em></p> </blockquote>
<p>You think that’s bad? Get ready for this one:</p>
<blockquote> <p><em><strong>FPS [Federal Protective Services] reported a fire to PPB, but the “fire” turned out to be candles lit for a vigil set up by demonstrators.</strong></em></p> </blockquote>
<p>In fact, most of the “violence” observed by federal officers was either unprovoked attacks by officers against protesters or instigated by Trump fans who rolled up on peaceful protests in hopes of picking a fight.</p>
<blockquote> <p><em><strong>This Court finds that many reported disturbances at the ICE Facility after July 4 did not involve law enforcement at all.</strong> This Court also received evidence regarding disruptive behavior between individuals within the vicinity of the ICE building since June. <strong>Specifically, this Court received evidence regarding altercations between protesters and counter-protesters.</strong> Based on that evidence, this Court finds the following: Violence between protesters and counter-protesters occurred outside the Portland ICE building from June to September 27, 2025, but had, at most, a minimal effect on federal law enforcement’s protection of the building and federal personnel.</em></p> </blockquote>
<p>106 pages. Read it all. Lie after lie after lie from the administration and the small team of DOJ lawyers still willing to appease Trump, rather than seek justice:</p>
<blockquote> <p><em>As related to the time period immediately before the President’s callout of the National Guard, this Court heard testimony from FPS officers that PPB does not respond to their requests and that FPS stopped calling PPB altogether. <strong>The Court does not find this testimony to be credible</strong>.</em></p> <p><em><strong>The Court finds that there is no credible evidence that protest activities at the ICE facility created more than a minimal interference</strong> with Defendants’ ability to enforce Title 8 immigration laws in Portland. Director Wamsley testified herself that “altercations between protesters” do not “inhibit the execution of federal immigration law.”</em></p> </blockquote>
<p>There’s no “rebellion” happening here, the judge says, quoting the same law the administration is now abusing on a regular basis. There’s no concerted effort to seize control of federal property. There are no persistent attacks on federal or local law enforcement. There’s no organized group hoping to seize power. This is exactly the sort of thing this particular administration is incapable of handing: a persistent display of opposition that rarely, if ever, engages in the sort of behavior that <em>might</em> justify the deployment of military troops. The protesters are a fly the government can’t swat, whose mere existence is annoying enough the Commander-in-Chief and his immediate underlings have to constantly <em>lie</em> about to salvage their unconstitutional acts. And, despite all of their power, they’re losing this battle. Let’s see if the Ninth Circuit is willing to make this loss permanent.</p>
<figure><p class="rw-outer-content"><span>Some content could not be imported from the original document.</span> <a href="https://embed.documentcloud.org/documents/26222005-portland-national-guard/?embed=1&amp;title=0&amp;pdf=0&amp;fullscreen=0&amp;onlyshoworg=0">View content ↗ </a></p></figure>
