---
author: Michael Eaude
cover_image: >-
  https://assets.guim.co.uk/images/eada8aa27c12fe2d5afa3a89d3fbae0d/fallback-logo.png
date: '2026-01-26T03:08:39.982Z'
dateFolder: 2026/01/25
description: 'Obituary: Spanish revolutionary, psychiatrist and writer who supported Eta.'
isBasedOn: 'https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jun/06/guardianobituaries.spain'
link: 'https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jun/06/guardianobituaries.spain'
slug: 2026-01-25-httpswwwtheguardiancomnews2007jun06guardianobituariesspain
tags:
  - history
title: Eva Forest
---
<h2 data-gu-name="standfirst">Spanish revolutionary, psychiatrist and writer who supported Eta</h2>
<p>Eva Forest, who has died aged 79, was one of the best-known symbols of the resistance to the Franco dictatorship in <a data-component="auto-linked-tag" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain">Spain</a>. While she was held without trial from September 1974 to June 1977 in Yeserías prison, Madrid, from three days after the bombing of the Cafe Rolando in central Madrid, it was widely feared she could be summarily tried and executed for her alleged involvement. The attack on the cafe, frequented by policemen, killed 13 people and injured 80.</p>
<p>She was born to anarchist parents in Barcelona and did not attend school until after the end of the civil war in 1939, because her parents considered school an oppressive institution. In 1950 she left Barcelona to study medicine in Madrid, and in 1955, her final year, met and married Alfonso Sastre, who was to become a well-known playwright. It was an intimate personal and political relationship that lasted until her death. After Sastre's arrest for involvement in the 1956 university protests against the dictatorship, they left for exile in Paris, where Eva wrote a novel, Febrero (February), about the protests, and their first son, Juan, was born.</p>
<p>Returning to Spain in 1962, she was arrested for organising a women's demonstration in support of the Asturias miners' strike and spent a month in prison with her baby daughter, Eva, because she refused to pay the fine. Such intransigence and courage marked her politics throughout her life. After her first of many visits to Cuba, in 1966, she published Los Nuevos Cubanos (The New Cubans). Back in Madrid, she launched a Cuba Solidarity Committee. In the 1968 period of strikes and unrest in Spain, she co-founded the clandestine bulletins Información and Estado de Excepción (State of Emergency). In these years, she worked in a psychiatry collective, was active in Spain's nascent women's movement and joined the illegal Spanish Communist party.</p>
<p>In 1970, she employed her tremendous energy in a Committee of Solidarity with activists of Eta (the Basque urban guerrilla group) on trial for their lives at Burgos. Her links with Eta helped her write, under the pseudonym Julen Agirre, Operación Ogro (translated to English as Operation Ogro: The Execution of Admiral Luis Carrero Blanco), an account of the Eta assassination of Franco's chosen successor in 1973.</p>
<p>The bombing of the Cafe Rolando has remained a mystery. Eva Forest has never talked about it, refusing to reply to diverse accusations about her role. Both she and Sastre left the Communist party in the early 1970s, critical of its reformist policy, and she became heavily involved in support work (safe houses, messages and so on) for Eta action groups in Madrid. Despite this, curiously, she and her fellow detainees were never formally charged. Whether directly involved or not in the Cafe Rolando attack, she clearly now supported Eta's policy of armed struggle to win Basque independence.</p>
<p>1975 saw the Paris publication of her prison diary and letters, issued in Britain as a Penguin special with the title From a Spanish Jail. The book sold well throughout <a data-component="auto-linked-tag" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news">Europe</a> and made her famous as a woman brutally treated by state terror.</p>
<p>On her release, she and Sastre settled in Hondarribia, in the Basque Country, just on the Spanish side of the French border. From then until her death, she was a prominent supporter of Herri Batasuna, the Basque nationalist coalition supporting Eta. In 1979 she helped found Torturaren Aurkako Taldea (TAT), a campaign against torture still, "unfortunately" as she said, going strong. This led to her book Tortura y Democracia (1987).</p>
<p>In 1989 she was elected on the Batasuna ticket to the Spanish senate (upper house) until 1993. In 1991 she created Hiru, a publishing house dedicated to issuing in cheap editions what she called "emergency literature": political texts that could not be published elsewhere. She published novels, too: literature was always a passion.</p>
<p>Psychiatrist, journalist, novelist, author of some dozen books, publisher, Forest was above all a political campaigner. Committed to revolutionary politics, for five decades she fought against dictatorship, for women's liberation, in support of Basque independence, denouncing torture and in solidarity with Cuba. She wrote regularly in the radical Basque dailies Egin (banned in 1998) and its successor Gara.</p>
<p>She is survived by her husband and their three children, Juan, Pablo and Eva.</p>
<p><b>· </b> Genoveva Forest Tarrat, revolutionary, born April 6 1928; died May 19 2007</p>
