---
author: Mary Turfah
cover_image: >-
  http://static1.squarespace.com/static/6345b5cd7fd9663af3ed4b99/t/686d51948f8cc932d6a5ad9b/1751994772784/turfah3.jpg?format=1500w
date: '2025-07-15T11:09:21.729Z'
dateFolder: 2025/07/15
description: >-
  This is certainly a plan, “pressuring” or “forcing an enemy’s hand” convenient
  euphemisms for something like “threatening collective extermination.
isBasedOn: 'https://www.parapraxismagazine.com/articles/complicity'
link: 'https://www.parapraxismagazine.com/articles/complicity'
slug: 2025-07-15-httpswwwparapraxismagazinecomarticlescomplicity
tags:
  - israel
title: Complicity - Parapraxis
---
<div><div>
<p>This is certainly a plan, “pressuring” or “forcing an enemy’s hand” convenient euphemisms for something like “threatening collective extermination.” The cliché goes that words matter, and whether you call it “hell” or genocide is a choice, one that depends<br/> on whether you see in genocide the potential for strategic gains (this discernment inversely proportional to how human you see your enemy), which is to say, whether you condone genocide as a legitimate means to a desired end: here, ethnic cleansing. </p><p>At the same time, Israel and the United States air talk of the day-after and invite the world to listen in. We should understand this as psychological warfare, disseminating a vision for the future as though it’s an inevitability, to sow helplessness in people who might wish to see things differently, who have the means to make the future different. <br/><br/>Where the previous American president was able over the course of many months to bring into being some of his revenge dream against Palestinians, the current president’s term has only just begun; his dream world remains largely in his head. Joe Biden enacted a genocide, and Donald Trump’s task is to pick up where his predecessor left off. In February 2025, alongside Israel’s prime minister, Trump presented his next steps. One could practically see the developer gears in his brain turning as Trump explained his plan to turn an ethnically cleansed Gaza owned by the United States into an “international, unbelievable place . . . the potential in the Gaza strip is unbelievable.” Everyone, including Palestinians, could live in what would be “the Riviera of the Middle East.” <br/><br/>Where in the past rendering a vision for an audience required recruitment of more of the latter’s imaginative faculties, today we have assistive technologies that manifest with more fullness (and however poorly) the speaker’s dreams, while also blunting our own. To see through Donald Trump’s eyes, with our own, all we do is sit back and watch. Not long after the president offered his vision of a future Gaza, two Israeli American filmmakers materialized this future in the shape of an AI-generated video posted to Instagram. The video was picked up by Trump and shared to his account on Truth Social, a social media site he owns. <br/><br/>It opens with grey skies and rubble, clips of parents holding children’s hands as they brace these ruins with sunken shoulders. A child dressed in rags sprints toward us and away from something, EDM building a sense of beginning. Two men in anonymizing head wrappings walk through a tunnel that is notably above ground, their backs facing us. Next clip, the men are swapped for a woman and two boys, and now through the tunnel instead of destruction we see what looks like any beach in the developer paradise Dubai. The sky is blue, and against sand and palm trees and sun, high-rises glint. A few shots of some streets, children running—now playfully, their backs still to us. And then a face we recognize: Elon Musk smiling and eat- ing a bowl of something on the beach. Then, bearded belly dancers on the beach, Donald Trump and a not-bearded belly dancer at a nightclub, children jumping under cash raining down from the sky, a building with a porte-cochère that reads “Trump Gaza,” Musk eating again, a gold market, and finally, Trump and Netanyahu in swimsuits, lounging poolside at the former’s hotel. A song rings in the background, <em>Trump Gaza shining bright, a golden future, a brand-new light </em>and every now and then a child, presumably Palestinian, wanders the street, balloon in hand. <br/><br/>The video, the filmmakers claimed, is satire. It takes a certain kind of person to think up this kind of joke. One of them asked hypothetically in a conversation with <em>The New Yorker</em>, “What if Trump really will take over Gaza? I mean, it’s not such a bad thought. I’m not totally against it.” He then added the politically correct caveat: the Palestinians. “I think it’s not realistic unless he includes them in it.” The problem, for him, is logistical. <br/><br/>The video went viral and was met with widespread and strong-worded condemnation from the liberal press. CNN called the video “bizarre, some would say outright offensive.” The BBC noted that “thousands of people have been killed [in Gaza], and this video shows it transformed into a holiday resort. It sparked a <em>huge </em>reaction online. Outrage, upset, confusion, incredulity, and some people who think it is a funny form of trolling or political satire.” <em>The New Yorker </em>called the day-after it envisions “grotesquely slick.” The urgency of their response can’t reflect concern for Palestinians: each of these outlets has carried water for genocide, and each of us carries an archive of much worse things we’ve seen—things that actually happened to or were done by people—since the start of the acute phase of the genocide, and after. A photo taken from Khan Younis or Jabaliya today evidences what might have warranted a wagged finger, if the concern had been these people. Instead, it seems liberals took the video as an affront to themselves. <br/><br/>Many of those who denounced the Trump Gaza video spent the Biden years demanding civility at home, respectful debate, appropriate tone. They condemned college student protesters’ tactics and especially their word choices. An illustration accompanying “Shibboleth,” an essay in <em>The New Yorker </em>by the writer Zadie Smith in May 2024, depicts a missile that appears to be shedding various banners that read things like “terrorist,” “colonialist,” “existential threat,” “Zionist,” as it follows a trajectory to who knows where. In the essay, Smith takes issue with students’ use of “‘Zionist’ as if that word were an unchanged and unchangeable monolith, meaning exactly the same thing in 2024 and 1948 as it meant in 1890 or 1901 or 1920.” The steady, beating heart of Zionism is religious supremacy, one that necessarily justifies the ethnic cleansing of Palestinians from the whole of Palestine, by whatever means Zionists (Israelis and their colonial sponsors) deem necessary. Zionism also means that other Arabs must be killed as the Zionist state’s borders expand at a tempo that changes depending on which Zionists are in power. The national make-up of the non-Palestinian Arabs killed by Israel today—mostly Lebanese and Syrians—is different than it was in 1901, although these aren’t the sorts of fluctuation in meaning or people Smith had in mind. Instead, she is interested in what Zionism has meant and means to Zionists (akin to asking us to consider what Operation Iraqi Freedom means to American soldiers, or what slavery means to a slave owner—not an entirely useless path of inquiry, were the goal, say, to make sense of the psychology that lubricates atrocity). <br/><br/>Smith writes in “Shibboleth” that “language and rhetoric are and always have been weapons of mass destruction.” I can’t imagine she didn’t know what she was doing with that phrase. Maybe she and her editors read the line as cheeky, the intended American reader’s conscience unburdened today as then by the murderous consequences of their country’s false pretexts. The essay—the ending of which elaborates her brave refusal to take a material side (imagining condemnations, she dares the affronted, “Put me wherever you want: misguided socialist, toothless humanist, naïve novelist, useful idiot, apologist, denier, ally, contrarian, collaborator, traitor, inexcusable coward”)—was written during the Biden administration. Devoted liberal that she is, it makes sense that it does not mention him at all. It also makes sense that in her March 2025 essay for the <em>New York Review of Books</em>, “Trump Gaza Number One,” about the Trump AI video and its ramifications, she mentions the current president by name several times. <br/><br/>It helps that Trump has a gift for making things about himself. He’s about as good at it as liberals are at making Palestinians about themselves. The <em>NYRB </em>essay’s subtitle reads, “the AI-generated vision of postwar Gaza that Trump posted on social media was only thirty-three seconds long, but it spoke volumes about how his administration sees the world.” Since before his inauguration, liberals have been clear in saying that Trump neither speaks nor acts on their behalf. Yes, Biden committed genocide—or something akin to this that they insist on calling something else—but he wasn’t so crass or insensitive. “The pressing job of the left right now,” Smith writes in her more recent essay, “is to expose” the “illusion” that the wretched of the earth live apart from us. The task of the “left” is “to insist that this <em>is </em>in fact one world we are living in.” For this, “we need transnational institutions which—however imperfect—persist through time, and can’t be unilaterally destroyed by the group of ideological gangsters presently occupying the White House.” We might recall that the Biden administration—by insisting on providing cover for genocide and turning the United Nations into a stage for Israel to flout its impunity—did more to undermine the sanctity of international law than perhaps any other government since the body (which, anyhow, created Israel and has virtually always protected colonial interests against the global south) was established. <br/><br/>The principle issue for Smith is that “a general concept of the human does not exist for this White House. There are Americans and then there is everybody else.” This isn’t a problem specific to the Trump White House, nor is the primary binary American/non-American. What moves Trump is the same supremacy that allows one to call a genocide a “hell plan,” to nod cleverly at “weapons of mass destruction.” Trump’s version is simply more eager. Self-image motivates these essays against him: for much of the world, especially the global south, Trump lays bare a version of the West that liberals don’t want to see. </p>
</div>
</div>
