---
author: >-
  Maura Judkis & Adam Taylor & Lori Rozsa & Carolyn Hax & Andrew O'Shaughnessy &
  Dan Rosenzweig-Ziff & Brianna Tucker & Emma Uber & Jenny Gathright & Emily
  Davies
cover_image: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-apps/imrs.php?src=https://arc-anglerfish-washpost-prod-washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/3Z4ORKQQ7P5GFVGSUPAOE2L36M.jpg&w=1440
date: '2025-08-22T15:06:16.019Z'
dateFolder: 2025/08/22
description: >-
  The classic cheerleading film, starring Kirsten Dunst, still has what it takes
  to get a crowd going.
isBasedOn: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/2025/08/22/bring-it-on-25-kirsten-dunst/
link: >-
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/2025/08/22/bring-it-on-25-kirsten-dunst/
slug: >-
  2025-08-22-httpswwwwashingtonpostcomentertainment20250822bring-it-on-25-kirsten-dunst
tags:
  - film
  - culture
title: 'On its 25th anniversary, ‘Bring It On’ deserves all the spirit fingers'
---
<div><div><div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="F7HEUE67YBCDBBPRBGPTDOTZQA" data-el="text" dir="null">Twenty-five years ago, the character Torrance Shipman tumbled her way into the American teenage psyche. She was the captain of the Toros, a cheerleading squad in the 2000 film “Bring It On,” and she had it all, as the opening chant spells out:<i> I’m pretty [clap] I’m cool [clap] I dominate this school.</i></p></div></div><p></p><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="4JC6LZR4S5AJLHXGL2KCTE7Y6A" data-el="text" dir="null">Nimbly played by Kirsten Dunst, Torrance does not — spoiler — lead her team to victory in the end. But she does two other things that are far more interesting — things that have kept the film relevant 25 years later. Torrance earned high school cheerleaders the respect they deserved as female athletes, challenging the blonde-bimbo stereotype. And she did it in a film that purports to be about cheerleading but actually is about White privilege, swagger jacking and equity.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="A5QEQGUNYFGSVBWJAS23PRFLVU" data-el="text" dir="null">Maybe it takes a chirpy girl with a bared midriff and a ponytail to trick Americans into watching something this progressive. “Bring It On,” directed by Peyton Reed, is about a team from White, upper-middle-class San Diego high school, who discover that their previous cheer captains have been stealing routines from the Clovers, a squad from an inner-city school in East Compton.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="FXCIGGVQWRHLNFPIFV27A6S7XM" data-el="text" dir="null">“Every time we get some, here y’all come trying to steal it, putting some blonde hair on it and calling it something different,” says Clovers captain Isis (Gabrielle Union). “We’ve had the best squad around for years, but no one’s been able to see what we can do.”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="VKN23VYLJJHJVCLLJL5JZ2THBE" data-el="text" dir="null">Determined to make things right, Torrance pushes her squad of Toros<b> </b>to learn an original routine, and even tries to have her father’s company sponsor the Clovers, who have never had the funding to<b> </b>compete at nationals. The plucky Clovers turn down the “guilt money” and make it to the competition on their own, where both teams compete in the finals against each other. While it would have been tidy for the writers to hand the victory to the Toros, who are positioned as the underdogs, the true underdogs — the Clovers — win instead. Fox News would call that ending “woke.”</p></div><p data-qa="article-body" data-target-index="1"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="RUQPJ3AE65HXDPYYQ3FSIANMPE" data-el="text" dir="null">All the while, it’s sweet and silly, with lines still quotable to millennials and younger generations of cheerleaders who continue to fall in love with the film. “This is not a democracy, it’s a cheerocracy,” Torrance memorably remarks. And the cheers are still earworms: “Brrrr / it’s cold in here / there must be some Toros in the atmosphere.” (The screenplay by Jessica Bendinger does have its flaws: Film scholars could write entire dissertations on the casual homophobia of Y2K teen films, this one included.)</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="BI76CTSSNZHD5DNNIQB74RCEBA" data-el="text" dir="null">“Everyone quotes the movie, like, all the time” on her squads, says <a href="https://www.instagram.com/hailey_dlynn/" target="_blank">Hailey D’Lynn Smith, 22</a>, who could be considered one of the best cheerleaders on the planet, with three world championship titles with the U.S. national squad and back-to-back stunt championships.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="HCBRQEEJQBHDTGKMQZPK7IAFCQ" data-el="text" dir="null">“Bring It On” might have been the first movie — and remains among the only scripted franchises — to view cheerleading as a sport and cheerleaders as something more than just eye candy at a football game. It made early-aughts teen girls feel validated and strong, even as it gently lampooned their sport.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="3PNR7IW3INAS7DSKD4OIII6WBQ" data-el="text" dir="null">“Ever been to a cheerleading competition?” Torrance asks Missy Pantone, the film’s outsider, a former gymnast who has joined the squad, played by “Buffy” alum Eliza Dushku.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="6EDX5VYA2VFGJPZGAJ2GIOZADI" data-el="text" dir="null">“Oh, you mean like a football game?” Missy replies.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="7NYXQ4MYCRD73GEKB5Z347XIAU" data-el="text" dir="null">“No, not a game, those are like practices for us,” Torrance says. (The football team’s ineptitude is a running joke throughout the film.) “I’m talking about a tournament. ESPN cameras all around. Hundreds of people cheering.” She also describes cheerleaders as gymnasts, “except no beams, no bars, no vault.” In 2000, this was still a novel concept.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="WYFC55G2L5FQZIWGVJPPD3OCK4" data-el="text" dir="null">Cheerleading has changed a lot in those 25 years. Those stunts have gotten bigger and <a href="https://www.npr.org/sections/shots-health-news/2024/10/23/nx-s1-5162335/cheerleader-stunts-kids-injuries-safety" target="_blank">more dangerous</a> — the routines the Toros and Clovers take to nationals seem downright quaint compared with the stuff teens are doing out on the floor at competitions these days. There’s less cheering and dancing, and more death-defying acrobatics and Olympic-level tumbling.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="ZO75Q7GTA5HRLNDKXV76DI37BI" data-el="text" dir="null">The cheerleaders who saw “Bring It On” in theaters with their cheerleading squads in 2000 now have daughters (and sons!) on squads. And cheerleaders who are younger than the movie, like Smith, still consider it to be a classic.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="6BCFBTFGMZCNNDTFXFSRAQCHKA" data-el="text" dir="null">It “predicted some of the most intense rivalries to ever happen in cheerleading in real life,” Smith says, like the one depicted on <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/tv/2022/01/11/cheer-season-2-review/" target="_blank">Season 2 of “Cheer,”</a> Netflix’s documentary series about cheerleading squads at two Texas community colleges.</p></div><p data-qa="article-body"></p><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="V7TXAWJEBJGELFWV544PCRJFOE" data-el="text" dir="null">Other cheerleading shows and movies have not lived up to the example of “Bring It On,” artistically, athletically or morally. “Cheer” became shrouded in scandal after one of its stars was convicted of child pornography charges. “America’s Sweethearts” is an ongoing Netflix documentary series chronicling the Dallas Cowboys cheer squad — which, athletically, is really more of a dance team because it doesn’t do stunts.<b> </b>Six “Bring It On” sequels released direct to video or television between 2004 and 2022 never captured the attention of the original, and a 2012 <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/theater_dance/cheerleading-in-popular-culture-almost-at-vic-to-ree/2012/08/01/gJQAQcjTUX_story.html" target="_blank">spin-off Broadway musical</a> didn’t find widespread success, despite two Tony nominations and the involvement of Lin-Manuel Miranda.</p></div><div data-qa="article-body"><p data-apitype="text" data-contentid="NWWQ7OK6BBCWFLMWL55BHNJ64U" data-el="text" dir="null">Which leaves “Bring It On,” 25 years later, as the seminal piece of cheerleading media — “<a href="https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/fired-up-2009" target="_blank">The ‘Citizen Kane’ of cheerleader movies</a>,” as critic Roger Ebert once wrote — still functioning as<b> </b>an intro to critical race theory in a pleated skirt with pompoms. American democracy may be imperiled, but its cheerocracy is still going strong.</p></div></div></div>
