---
author: John Gruber
cover_image: 'https://daringfireball.net/graphics/df-wide-card.png'
date: '2025-12-04T06:17:24.412Z'
dateFolder: 2025/12/04
description: >-
  It might have made some sense to bring someone from the fashion/brand world to
  lead software design for Apple Watch, but it sure didn’t seem to make sense
  for the rest of Apple’s platforms. And the decade of Dye’s HI leadership has
  proven it.
isBasedOn: 'https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job'
link: 'https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job'
slug: 2025-12-04-httpsdaringfireballnet202512baddyejob
tags:
  - tech
title: Bad Dye Job
---
<p>In <a href="https://daringfireball.net/linked/2025/12/03/alan-dye-leaves-apple-for-meta">my post earlier today</a> on the then-breaking news that Alan Dye has left Apple to join Meta as chief design officer (<a href="https://www.meta.com/media-gallery/executives/">a new title at the company</a><sup><a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fn1-2025-12-03">1</a></sup>), I wrote:</p>
<blockquote> <p>It sounds like Dye chose to jump ship, and wasn’t squeezed out (as it seems <a href="https://daringfireball.net/linked/2025/12/01/giannandrea-out">with former AI chief John Giannandrea</a> earlier this week). Gurman/Bloomberg are spinning this like a coup for Meta (headline: “<a href="https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2025-12-03/apple-design-executive-alan-dye-poached-by-meta-in-major-coup">Apple Design Executive Alan Dye Poached by Meta in Major Coup</a>”), but I think this is the best personnel news at Apple in decades. Dye’s decade-long stint running Apple’s software design team has been, on the whole, terrible — and rather than getting better, the problems have been getting worse.</p> </blockquote>
<p>Dye’s replacement at Apple is longtime Apple designer Stephen Lemay. I’ve never met Lemay (or at least can’t recall meeting him), and prior to today never heard much about him. But that’s typical for Apple employees. Part of the job working for Apple is remaining under the radar and out of the public eye. What I’ve learned today is that Lemay, very much unlike Dye, is a career interface/interaction designer. Sources I’ve spoken to who’ve worked with Lemay at Apple speak highly of him, particularly his attention to detail and craftsmanship. Those things have been sorely lacking in the Dye era. Not everyone loves everything Lemay has worked on, but nobody bats 1.000 and designers love to critique each other’s work. I’ve chatted with people with criticisms of specific things Lemay has worked on or led at Apple (e.g. aspects of iPadOS multitasking that struck many of us as deliberately limiting, rather than empowering), but <em>everyone</em> I’ve spoken to is happy — if not downright giddy — at the news that Lemay is replacing Dye. Lemay is well-liked personally and deeply respected talent-wise. Said one source, in a position to know the choices, “I don’t think there was a better choice than Lemay.”</p>
<p>The sentiment within the ranks at Apple is that today’s news is almost too good to be true. People had given up hope that Dye would ever get squeezed out, and no one expected that he’d just up and leave on his own. (If you care about design, there’s nowhere to go but down after leaving Apple. What people overlooked is the obvious: Alan Dye doesn’t actually care about design.)</p>
<p>What I struggled with in the wake of today’s news is how to square the following contradiction:</p>
<ul> <li><p>Dye apparently left for Meta on his own; he wasn’t squeezed out.</p></li> <li><p>Apple replacing Dye with Lemay seemingly signals a significant shift in direction, replacing a guy whose approach was almost entirely superficial/visual with a guy who’s spent his entire career sweating actual interaction details.</p></li> </ul>
<p>If Apple’s senior leadership would have been happy to have Dye remain as leader of Apple’s software design teams, why didn’t they replace him with a Dye acolyte? Conversely, if the decision makers at Apple saw the need for a directional change, why wasn’t Dye pushed out?<sup><a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fn2-2025-12-03">2</a></sup></p>
<p>The answer, I think, is that the decision to elevate Lemay wasn’t about direction, but loyalty. Why risk putting in a Dye-aligned replacement when that person might immediately get poached too? We know, from this year’s AI recruitment battles, that Zuckerberg is willing to throw <a href="https://fortune.com/2025/06/18/metas-100-million-signing-bonuses-openai-staff-extreme-ai-talent-war/">almost unfathomable sums of money</a> to poach talent he wants to hire from competitors. Gurman reported that Billy Sorrentino, a Dye deputy who has served as a senior director of design at Apple since 2016, is leaving for Meta with Dye.<sup><a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fn3-2025-12-03">3</a></sup> I don’t have any other names, but word on the street is that other members of Dye’s inner circle are leaving Apple for Meta with him. But those who remain — or who might remain, if they’d have been offered the promotion to replace Dye — simply can’t be trusted from the perspective of senior leadership, who were apparently blindsided by Dye’s departure for Meta. They wouldn’t have given Dye a prime spot in the WWDC keynote if they thought he might be leaving within months.</p>
<p>So the change in direction we may see — that many of us desperately <em>hope</em> to see — under Lemay’s leadership might be happenstance. More a factor of Lemay being politically safe, as someone predating Dye and outside Dye’s inner circle at Apple, than from Tim Cook or anyone else in senior leadership seeing a <em>need</em> for a directional change in UI design. But happenstance or not, it could be the best thing to happen to Apple’s HI design in the entire stretch since Steve Jobs’s passing and Scott Forstall’s ouster.</p>
<p>Putting Alan Dye in charge of user interface design was the one big mistake Jony Ive made as Apple’s Chief Design Officer.<sup><a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fn4-2025-12-03">4</a></sup> Dye had no background in user interface design — he came from a brand and print advertising background. Before joining Apple, <a href="https://thenextweb.com/news/how-alan-dye-went-from-iphone-box-designer-to-apples-head-of-ui">he was design director for the fashion brand Kate Spade</a>, and before that worked on branding for the ad agency Ogilvy. His promotion to lead Apple’s software interface design team under Ive happened in 2015, when Apple was launching Apple Watch, their closest foray into the world of fashion. It might have made some sense to bring someone from the fashion/brand world to lead software design for Apple Watch, but it sure didn’t seem to make sense for the rest of Apple’s platforms. And the decade of Dye’s HI leadership has proven it.</p>
<p>The most galling moment in Dye’s entire tenure was <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H3KnMyojEQU">the opening of this year’s iPhone event keynote in September</a>, which began with a title card showing the <a href="https://daringfireball.net/linked/2007/01/23/how-it-works">oft-cited Jobs quote</a> “Design is not just what it looks like and feels like. Design is how it works.” The whole problem with the Dye era of HI design at Apple is that it has so largely — not entirely, but largely — been driven purely by how things look. There are a lot of things in Apple’s software — <a href="https://daringfireball.net/linked/2025/11/07/tahoes-terrible-icons">like app icons</a> — that don’t even look good any more. But it’s the “how it works” part that has gone so horribly off the rails. Alan Dye seems like <em>exactly</em> the sort of person Jobs was describing in the first part of that quote: “People think it’s this veneer — that the designers are handed this box and told, ‘Make it look good!’”</p>
<p>I am not a Liquid Glass hater. I actually think, on the whole, iOS 26 is a better and more usable UI than iOS 18. But MacOS 26 Tahoe is a mess, visually, and I’m not sure there’s a single thing about its UI that is better than MacOS 15 Sequoia. There are <a href="https://sixcolors.com/post/2025/09/macos-26-tahoe-review-power-under-glass/">new software features in Tahoe</a> that are excellent and serve as legitimate enticements to upgrade. But I’m talking about the user interface — the work from Alan Dye’s HI team, not Craig Federighi’s teams. I think the fact that Liquid Glass is worse on MacOS than it is on iOS is not just a factor of iOS being Apple’s most popular, most profitable, most important platform — and thus garnering more of Apple’s internal attention. I think it’s also about the fact that the Mac interface, with multiple windows, bigger displays, and more complexity, demands more nuanced, more expert, interaction design skills. Things like depth, layering, and unambiguous indications of input focus are important aspects of any platform. But they’re more important on the platform which, by design, shoulders more complexity. Back in 2010, predicting a bright future for the Mac at a time when many pundits were thinking Apple would soon put the entire platform out to pasture, I wrote, “<a href="https://daringfireball.net/2010/12/future_of_the_mac_in_an_ios_world">It’s the heaviness of the Mac that allows iOS to remain light</a>.” That remains as true today as it was 15 years ago. But Liquid Glass, especially as expressed on MacOS, is a lightweight poorly considered design system as a whole, and its conceptual thinness is not sufficient to properly allow the Mac to carry the weight it needs to bear.</p>
<p>Perhaps more tellingly, there should have been no need for the “<a href="https://daringfireball.net/linked/2025/10/21/ios-26-1-beta-4-liquid-glass-tinted-option">clear/tinted</a>” Liquid Glass preference setting that Apple added in the 26.1 OS releases. Alan Dye wasn’t fired, by all accounts, but that preference setting was as good a sign as any that he should have been. And it’s very much a sign that inside Apple, there’s a strong enough contingent of people who prioritize how things work — like, you know, <a href="https://x.com/Namelongnumbers/status/1996303867735375978">whether you can read text against the background of an alert</a> — to get a setting like this shipped, outside the Accessibility section of Settings.</p>
<p>It remains worrisome that Apple needed to luck into Dye leaving the company. But fortune favors the prepared, and Apple remains prepared by having an inordinate number of longtime talented HI designers at the company. The oddest thing about Alan Dye’s stint leading software design is that there are, effectively, zero design critics who’ve been on his side. The debate regarding Apple’s software design over the last decade isn’t between those on Dye’s side and those against. It’s only a matter of debating how bad it’s been, and how far it’s fallen from its previous remarkable heights. It’s rather extraordinary in today’s hyper-partisan world that there’s nearly universal agreement amongst actual practitioners of user-interface design that Alan Dye is a fraud who led the company deeply astray. It was a big problem inside the company too. I’m aware of dozens of designers who’ve left Apple, out of frustration over the company’s direction, to work at places like LoveFrom, OpenAI, and their secretive joint venture <a href="https://daringfireball.net/linked/2025/05/21/sam-and-jony-io">io</a>. I’m not sure there are any experience designers at io who aren’t ex-Apple, and if there are, it’s only a handful. From the stories I’m aware of, the theme is identical: these are designers driven to do great work, and under Alan Dye, “doing great work” was no longer the guiding principle at Apple. If reaching the most users is your goal, go work on design at Google, or Microsoft, or Meta. (Design, of course, isn’t even a thing at Amazon.) Designers choose to work at Apple to do the best work in the industry. That has stopped being true under Alan Dye. The most talented designers I know are the harshest critics of Dye’s body of work, and the direction in which it’s been heading.</p>
<p>Back in June, after WWDC, I quoted from Alan Dye’s introduction of Liquid Glass during the keynote, and then quoted from <a href="https://youtu.be/dHrVGk0WwYM?t=381">Steve Jobs’s introduction of Aqua</a> when he unveiled the Mac OS X Public Beta in January 2000. <a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/06/some_brief_thoughts_and_observations_on_wwdc_2025">I wrote</a>:</p>
<blockquote> <p>Re-watching Jobs’s introduction of Aqua for the umpteenth time, I still find it enthralling. I found Alan Dye’s introduction of Liquid Glass to be soporific, if not downright horseshitty.</p> </blockquote>
<p>One of the bits from Jobs’s Aqua introduction I quoted was this:</p>
<blockquote> <p>This is what the top of windows look like. These three buttons look like a traffic signal, don’t they? Red means close the window. Yellow means minimize the window. And green means maximize the window. Pretty simple. And tremendous fit and finish in this operating system. When you roll over these things, you get those. You see them? And when you are no longer the key window, they go transparent. So a lot of fit and finish in this.</p> </blockquote>
<p>After I published that post, I got a note from a designer friend who left Apple, in frustration, a few years ago. After watching Jobs’s Aqua introduction for the first time in years, he told me, “I’m really struck by Steve directly speaking to ‘radio buttons’ and ‘the key window’.” He had the feeling that Dye and his team looked down on interface designers who used terms like Jobs himself once used — in a public keynote, no less. That to Dye’s circle, such terms felt too much like “programmer talk”. But the history of Apple (and NeXT) user interface design is the opposite. Designers and programmers used to — and still should — speak the exact same language about such concepts. Steve Jobs certainly did, and something feels profoundly broken about that disconnect under Alan Dye’s leadership. It’s like the head of cinematography for a movie telling the camera team to stop talking about nerdy shit like “f-stops”. The head of cinematography shouldn’t just abide talking about f-stops and focal lengths, but love it. Said my friend to me, regarding his interactions with Dye and his team at Apple, “I swear I had conversations in which I mentioned ‘key window’ and no one knew what I meant.”</p>
<p>That won’t be a problem with Stephen Lemay. Understanding of fundamental principles will no longer be lacking. Lemay has been at Apple spanning the gamut between the <a href="https://daringfireball.net/search/greg+christie">Greg Christie</a>/<a href="https://daringfireball.net/search/bas+ording">Bas Ording</a> glory days and the current era. At the very least, Lemay running HI should stop the bleeding — both in terms of work quality and talent retention. I sincerely believe things might measurably improve, but I’m more sure that things will stop getting worse. That alone will be a win for everyone — even though the change was seemingly driven by Mark Zuckerberg’s desire to poach Dye, not Tim Cook and Apple’s senior leadership realizing they should have shitcanned him long ago.</p>
<p>Alan Dye is not untalented. But his talents at Apple were in politics. His political skill was so profound that it was <em>his</em> decision to leave, despite the fact that his tenure is considered a disaster by actual designers inside and outside the company. He obviously figured out how to please Apple’s senior leadership. His departure today landed as a total surprise because his stature within the company seemed so secure. And so I think he might do very well at Meta. Not because he can bring world-class interaction design expertise — because he obviously can’t — but because the path to success at Meta has never been driven by design. It’s about getting done what Zuck wants done. Dye might excel at that. Dye was an anchor holding Apple back, but might elevate design at Meta.<sup><a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fn5-2025-12-03">5</a></sup></p>
<p>My favorite reaction to today’s news is <a href="https://x.com/8hipulin/status/1996318006335401997">this one-liner from a guy on Twitter/X</a>: “The average IQ of both companies has increased.”</p>
<ol> <li> <p>Titles are just titles, and title inflation is a real problem at all big companies. But I always thought C-level executives by definition report directly to the CEO. That that was the whole point of a “<em>chief whatever officer</em>” title versus “<em>senior vice president of whatever</em>”. But according to <a href="https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2025-12-03/apple-design-executive-alan-dye-poached-by-meta-in-major-coup">Mark Gurman’s exclusive report at Bloomberg</a> breaking this whole story (emphasis added):</p> <blockquote> <p>With the Dye hire, Meta is creating a new design studio and putting him in charge of design for hardware, software and AI integration for its interfaces. <em>He will be reporting to Chief Technology Officer Andrew Bosworth</em>, who oversees Reality Labs. That group is tasked with developing wearable devices, such as smart glasses and virtual reality headsets. Dye’s major focus will be revamping Meta’s consumer devices with artificial intelligence features.</p> </blockquote> <p>If true, Dye doesn’t even report directly to Mark Zuckerberg. Oddly enough, after <a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/07/jeff_williams_is_retiring_as_coo">the retirement of CFO Jeff Williams</a> this year, <a href="https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2025/07/apple-announces-chief-operating-officer-transition/">Apple claimed</a> the company’s design teams transitioned to reporting directly to CEO Tim Cook. <a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fnr1-2025-12-03">↩︎</a></p> </li> <li> <p>And man oh man am I curious who was involved with this decision, who had Tim Cook’s ear, and just how quickly they were forced to make it. Part of what made Stephen Lemay a popular choice within Apple’s ranks is that Lemay, by all accounts I’ve heard, isn’t a political operator and never angled for a promotion to a level of this prominence. His focus has always singularly been on the work. <a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fnr2-2025-12-03">↩︎︎</a></p> </li> <li> <p>Sorrentino was featured in a segment a litte over two minutes long in this year’s WWDC keynote, <a href="https://www.youtube.com/live/0_DjDdfqtUE?t=2305">starting at the 38:25 mark</a>, introducing the new iOS Visual Intelligence features. His star was rising at Apple. And Dye himself, of course, was given the spotlight to introduce and effectively take credit for Liquid Glass itself. At least until recently, no one at Apple saw this coming. <a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fnr3-2025-12-03">↩︎︎</a></p> </li> <li> <p>I have good reason to believe that Ive, in private, would be the first person to admit that. A fan of Liquid Glass Jony Ive is not. I believe he sees Dye as a graphic designer, not a user interface designer — and not a good graphic designer at that. I don’t think Alan Dye could get a job as a barista at LoveFrom. <a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fnr4-2025-12-03">↩︎︎</a></p> </li> <li> <p>It’s worth recalling that Zuckerberg sorta kinda tried this <em>poach-design-talent-from-Apple</em> thing before. Mike Matas, the wunderkind designer who became <a href="https://daringfireball.net/linked/2024/11/26/delicious-library-eol">a sensation with Delicious Library in 2005</a>, soon thereafter <a href="https://daringfireball.net/linked/2005/07/21/matas">moved on to work at Apple</a>, where he designed such things as the “slide to unlock” interface on the original iPhone. Matas was a key designer on that glorious first version of the iPhone’s OS. He then left Apple and formed Push Pop Press, and wound up at Facebook in 2011 after Facebook acquired Push Pop — before it had even shipped its core product. (I saw a still-in-development version of Push Pop’s publishing system in 2011, before Facebook bought them and shut down the product, and it remains to this day one of <a href="https://daringfireball.net/2011/02/push_pop_press">the most impressive, exciting, “this is the future” demos</a> I’ve ever seen. It’s not merely a shame but a goddamn tragedy that it never even shipped.) Zuckerberg wound up assembling around Matas an entire little superteam of <a href="https://weblog.rogueamoeba.com/2006/11/06/the-delicious-generation/">“Delicious” era</a> designers and design-focused developers. That team wound up shipping <a href="https://www.theverge.com/2014/1/30/5360358/facebook-paper-iphone-app">Facebook Paper in 2014</a> — an iOS-exclusive alternative client for Facebook that espoused the same principles of elegance, exquisite attention to detail, and, especially, <a href="https://www.theverge.com/2014/2/3/5373488/facebook-paper-app-review">direct manipulation of content in lieu of user interface chrome</a>, that infused Push Pop Press’s publishing system. Facebook Paper was so good it almost — <em>almost</em> — made me sign up for a Facebook account just so I could use it. But Facebook Paper went nowhere, fast. Zuckerberg lost his boner for “design”, Facebook Paper was <a href="https://9to5mac.com/2016/06/30/facebook-paper-dead/">pulled from the App Store</a> in 2016, and the team behind Paper disbanded.</p> <p>Matas today works at LoveFrom, and remains, to my mind, one of the most singularly talented and interesting people in the field of interaction design. In some closer-to-ideal alternate universe, Matas would be running HI design at Apple today. <a href="https://daringfireball.net/2025/12/bad_dye_job/#fnr5-2025-12-03">↩︎︎</a></p> </li> </ol>
