---
author: Megan Wachspress
cover_image: >-
  https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!FHGH!,f_auto,q_auto:best,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fcooperativeoverlapping.substack.com%2Ftwitter%2Fsubscribe-card.jpg%3Fv%3D838387497%26version%3D9
date: '2026-03-17T13:28:58.230Z'
dateFolder: 2026/03/17
description: >-
  Let me paint a picture of what it was like to be a woman math major at the
  University of Chicago circa 2004.
isBasedOn: >-
  https://cooperativeoverlapping.substack.com/p/a-fuller-statement-about-my-bluesky
link: >-
  https://cooperativeoverlapping.substack.com/p/a-fuller-statement-about-my-bluesky
slug: >-
  2026-03-17-httpscooperativeoverlappingsubstackcompa-fuller-statement-about-my-bluesky
tags:
  - women
  - academia
title: A Fuller Statement About My Bluesky Posts
---

<p>Let me paint a picture of what it was like to be a woman math major at the University of Chicago circa 2004. First: There were no tenured women faculty in the department. I don’t want to say with certainty there were no tenure-track women faculty either, but if there were you could count them on one hand and I didn’t know their names. In early 2005, Larry Summers would famously attribute this absence, not just at UChicago but throughout the country, to women’s lesser abilities. (We have only recently learned, through the disclosure of Summers’ <a href="https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2025/11/17/summers-epstein-wing-man-woman-described-as-mentee/">close, personal relationship with Jeffrey Epstein and correspondence regarding his attempt to seduce a more junior woman in his field</a>, what else might have caused this state of affairs.)</p>
<p>Second, the department was heavily tracked between honors and non-honors classes, and vanishingly few women remained on the honors track. By my junior year I spent a quarter as the <em>only </em>woman in a class of roughly 30 students in an Honors Abstract Algebra class.</p>
<p>Third, whether well-intentioned or not, the undergraduate chair employed (as in, sought out to hire) the top women math students in various departmental secretarial roles - as his personal secretary, for example, or managing the administrative backend of various K-12 outreach programs. It paid well and had flexible hours, so I took the job. A few months in, one of the other woman students revealed to me that if you closed the door between the chair’s office and the external area where the secretary sat, you could see the picture of a girl in a bikini the chair had hung there. A few more months in I started to realize the hidden costs of being visible as a “secretary” in a department where only men were professors.</p>
<p>Which is to say that when I - the top scorer on the first-quarter exam for the notoriously difficult Honors Analysis course taught by said department chair - enrolled in topology as a newly enthusiastic major (having switched from chemistry), I was already swimming upstream.</p>
<p>Rather than direct my enthusiasm for math to the subject, my topology professor (Daniel Biss) directed it at himself. In her fantastic essay for the <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/03/opinion/metoo-teachers-students-consent.html">New York Times</a>, Amia Srinivasan describes this trope and why it is malpractice for professors. My professor’s responses to my emails got longer and longer, topics extending well beyond mathematics; office hours lasted later and later. Flattered and insecure, I convinced myself it didn’t mean anything - I was a student, after all! - until the quarter ended, and he emailed to ask if I wanted to meet up, socially. He brought a book, with an inscription, which began “On the occasion of an end and a beginning…” It was signed, “With bundles of admiration.”</p>
<p>After a few very intense evenings, he had second thoughts. It was wrong to date a student, of course, so we would have to stop making out. Of course we could still <em>hang out</em>, and so we continued to spend time together in what to any external observer would look like dates, until gradually that stopped, too.</p>
<p>I was so, so ashamed. Here I was, desperate for credibility among my male peers, told by no less than the President of Harvard I lacked the capacity to do the work, <em>having made out with a professor</em>. I told a few non-math friends, but always with the understanding it was a secret.</p>
<p>Gradually, without ever really being honest with myself about why, I decided graduate school in math wasn’t for me, after all. I did just fine on tests, I told myself, but independent research was too hard. I liked political theory better. I finished the major, with honors, and went to grad school for something else, and tried to think about the experience as little as possible. (When Biss ran for governor, a friend who I had told about the situation at the time wrote to ask how I would feel if he voted for him; I said it was complicated.)</p>
<p>And then it became impossible to avoid confronting what had happened. Through a convoluted set of circumstances, I was on a Zoom call relating to my energy work with Biss a few years ago. He reached out afterward with a cryptic email - would I call him? A few days later I did. He offered an apology, of sorts, and then pivoted to the type of conversation you’d have with a friend with whom you’ve lost touch. A couple years later I read Srinivasan’s book chapter-length version of her NYTimes essay and sent it to him, but never got a response. At the time, I was working on Illinois matters for the Sierra Club and was too embarrassed and too afraid of what it would mean for my own career to tell the full story to anyone who didn’t already know.</p>
<p>When the IL-09 primary campaign became unavoidable for those of us who follow left politics, even out in California, I was miserable. This <em>thing </em>that had happened to me, that had been a huge part of why I gave up on a career that that same mathematics department chair once told me I was “born to do,” felt inescapable. (The chair said this, by the way, <em>while I could see the edges of the bikini poster </em>on his door, because even the most unequivocal endorsement came with mixed signals.) And I know the people signing up to staff a Congressional office would be like I had been: young, passionate about their jobs, all of their energy directed at building and maintaining the persona of this one official. I had no idea if I was the only student he’d dated, no way of finding out.</p>
<p>Most selfishly, but honestly most importantly, I finally felt secure enough in my own career to take on the huge risk of coming out publicly about such things: I had been hired for a tenure-track law teaching position. Still, I waited, terrified of what always happens to women who speak out about these things.</p>
<p>But it was also this career change, and knowing what it felt like from the other side of the relationship, knowing how I saw my students, and what it would take for me to view them not as people under my care but as objects of sexual desire, that made it impossible <em>not </em>to say anything. To want someone who wants to learn from you is to want someone for their powerlessness. And so, much later than I should, I realized this was my last chance, and I said something. I know it’s going to get ugly - it always does in these cases - but if there is one woman in a mathematics (or physics, or economics, or chemistry, or computer science) department out there who feels a little bit more empowered to recognize grooming for what it is, to insist on boundaries, to understand that <em>no matter how flattering it may feel when the professor looks at you like that, it will destroy your relationship with the thing that really matters, which is what he is supposed to be teaching you, and you deserve better</em>, well, it will have been worth it.</p>
<h4>Subscribe to Cooperative Overlapping</h4>
<p>By Megan Wachspress · Launched 2 years ago</p>
<p>Political commentary, often about prisons, gender, and labor, by a PhD in legal theory &amp; history and practicing environmental lawyer. Long-form, lots of citations, trying to pull together disparate ideas, timely but only after I've had time to think.</p>
<p>By subscribing, you agree Substack's <a href="https://substack.com/tos">Terms of Use</a>, and acknowledge its <a href="https://substack.com/ccpa#personal-data-collected">Information Collection Notice</a> and <a href="https://substack.com/privacy">Privacy Policy</a>.</p>
<h3>Ready for more?</h3>
<p>Subscribe</p>
